1 VOCABULARY & SPEAKING family a Look at some photos showing family members. What's happening in each one? What do you think the relationship is between the people? b With a partner, explain the difference between each pair. 1 a father and a parent 2 a mother and a stepmother 3 a brother and a brother-in-law 4 a grandfather and a great-grandfather 5 a nephew and a niece 6 a child and an only child 7 your immediate family and your extended family c The BBC recently did a survey of 21st-century famil ie, in the UK. Read Changing-for the better?and try to guess what the missing percentages are. Choose from the list. 
17% 26% 60% 75% 85% 
d 40150 Listen and check. Do any of the statistics surprise you? Which ones do you think would be very different if the survey was carried out in your country? e Work in small groups. Say what you think and give reasons. 
Do you think that...? • families should have a meal together every day • children should leave home as soon as they can afford to • parents should charge their children rent if they live at home and have a Job • parents should befriends' with their children on social networking sites, e.g. Facebook • elderly parents should live with their children when they are too old to live alone 
JD Useful language: Giving your opinion (2) We often use should+ verb to say what we think is the right thing or a good thing (to do), e.g. think families should have dinner together every day because... dont think parents should be friends with their children on Facebook because... 
Changing for the better? 
amily life is changing in the UK - but not in the r way we might think. When the BBC did a survey of families in Britain, they expected to find that family relationships were suffering because of the decline in traditional family structures. However, some of the results were quite surprising... 
and 
aged 20-24 still live at home with their parents. 
think that it is right for parents to charge rent to children over 25 who have a job and are living at home. 
use the Internet at least once a week to contact their families. 
On average, adults live 
kilometres from their parents. 

of people 
say that they have a close family. 
have a meal with their Immediate family every day. 
say that their families never argue. 
have fa in i ly members who they don't speak to any more 
think that families should look after grandparents. 
of people are happiest with their families. 
are happiest with friends. 
2 GRAMMAR future forms a tr1/116))) Listen to three dialogues between different family members. Who is talking to who (e.g. brother to sister)? What are they talking about? b Listen again and match two sentences with each dialogue (1-3). Shall I make you a cup of tea? D I'm staying the night there. 8 You'll drive too fast. E — Ill drive really slowly. C I'm not going to go to university yet. F In going to be cold tonight. c With a partner, decide which sentence (A-F) is... a plan or intention :   a prediction an offer an arrangement a promise d > p.133 Grammar Bank 18. Learn more about future forms and practise t 
3 PRONUNCIATION sentence stress 
pSentence stress An important aspect of speaking English is stressing the words in a sentence which carry the information, and not stressing the other ones. This will help you to communicate better and to speak with good rhythm. 
a 4121 a) Listen to the rhythm in these three dialogues. 1 A Are you coming home for dinner tonight? s No. rm going out with my friends. 2 A What are you going to don the summer? s were going to rent a house with my sister and her husband. 3 A DO you think they'll have children soon? B I don't think so. Not for a few years anyway. b Practise them with a partner. Copy the rhythm. c Ask and answer the questions below. Give as much information as possible. 
ARE YOU...? • having dinner with your family tonight • or is anyone in your family getting married soon • doing something with a family member this week • visiting a relative this weekend ARE YOU GOING TO...? • have a new nephew or niece soon • have a big family get-together soon • go on holiday with your family this year • buy a present for a member of your family this month DO YOU THINK...? • the number of people getting divorced will go up or down in the future • the birth rate will go up or down in your country • anyone in your family wilt live to be 90 or more • you will move away from (or back to) the area where your family live 
4 n40 SONG Our House 


READING a Which do you think has more advantages. being an only child, or having brothers and sisters? Why? b Work in pairs. A read The younger brother. B read The only child. c Tell your partner about 1 and 2 below. Whose childhood sounds happier? I other family members who are mentioned 2 how the writer's experience as a child affects him / her now d Look at the highlighted words in the two texts. Try to work out their meaning from the context. Then match them with definitions 1-12. _ adjill 2   its no surprise that 3  noun competition between two people 4  noun the time when you were a child 5  noun a meeting of people, e.g. family 6  noun people who are fully grown 7  adj knowing about or being conscious of WI 8  noun a school where children can live during the year verb think that sh or sth is important 10 verb divided sth between two or more people _ verb try to hurt sly else 12 noun a group of friends 
9 
I 
peach other When brothers and sisters get older they value each other more. Use each other to talk about an action between two people or groups of people, e.g. I don't get on very well with my dad - we don't understand each other. 
e Talk to a partner. Do you have brothers and sisters, or are you an only child? Do you feel positive or negative about it? 
L38% 
Younger brother only child? 
O 
Iniciar sesi6n 
THE YOUNGER BROTHER NOVELIST TIM LOTT 
Rivalry between brothers is normal. but there was a special reason for the tension between us. I was very ill when I was born, and spent three months in hospital with my mother. My brother did not see her at all during that time, as he went to stay with an aunt. %Then our mother returned home, it was with a sick newborn baby who took all the attention. No wonder he hated me (although if you If. he will say that he didn't - we • things differently). • "II • •• -re completely. IL; 1‘, .1 ;he same bedroom. but he wits I id).. I was really untidy. 1-k was rripw, I. , I was rebellious. Hr .motional. I haven't . I laories of our childhood together. Ilint.giz zitric mush have been good momentsjellsays we used to play Cowboys and Indians but I only remember him trying to suffocate me under the bedcovers. 
My relationship wikleir has influenced my attitude towards my own four daughters. If the girls fight, I always think that the younger child is innocent. But the good news about brothers and sisters is that when they get older, they value each other more. Jeff is now one of my best friends, and I like and admire him greatly. For better or for scone. we share a whole history. It is the longest relationship in my life. 
THE ONLY CHILD JOURNALIST SARAH LEE 
Twent to boarding school when I was seven, and the hardest thing I "found was making friends. Because I was an only child, I just didn't know how to do it. The thing is that when you're all only child you spend a lot of your time with adults and you're often the only child in a gathering of adults. Your parents go on living more or less the way they have always lived, only now you are there too. 1 found being an only child interesting because it gave me a view of world of adults that children in a big family might not get. And I know it has, at least partly, made me the kind of person I am - I never like being one of a poop, for example. If 1 have to be in a group,1 will always try to go off and do something on my own, or Ix with just one other person I'm not comfortable with being one of a gang. My parents are divorced now and my mother lives in the Us and my father in the UK. I feel very responsible for them I feel responsible for their happiness. I'm the closest relative in the world to each of them, and I ant very aware of that. 
Adapted from a British ncwspoper 

VOCABULARY adjectives of personality a Without looking back at The younger brother text, can you remember who was tidy, responsible, and sensible and who was untidy, rebellious, and emotional? Do you know what the adjectives mean? Would you use any of them to describe yourself? b > p.153 Vocabulary Bank Personality. c Write down the first three adjectives of personality that come into your head. Don't show them to your partner. Now go to Communication Personality p.204. 
7 PRONUNCIATION word stress, adjective endings a 411)26))) Underline the stressed syllable in these multi-syllable adjectives. Listen and check. 
1 jea lous an xious am bi tious generous re be llious 2 so as ble reliable 3 re span si ble senisilble 4 corn pejtijtive tallkaitive a ggreissive senlsiltIve S unlfriencilly iniselcure imipaltient ijrnmajture 
b Listen again and answer the questions. I Is -ous pronounced laps, or last? 2 Is -able pronounced labll or fetbli? 3 Is -ible pronounced /obi/ or 4 Is -ice pronounced /avi or inn'? 5 Are .ous -rtbk -ible -lye stressed? 6 Are un- in- im- stressed? 
8 LISTENING & SPEAKING 
a b 
What's your position in the family? Are you the oldest child, a middle child, the youngest child, or an only child? frit 270 Look at the cover of Linda Blair's book. Now listen to a journalist talking about it on a radio programme. Complete . the chart by writing four more adjectives of personality in each column. 
Oldest c hitch en Middle children Youngest children Only children 
sensin:e 
relaxed 
outgoing 
self-confident 
c Compare with a partner. Then listen to the four sections one by one. Check your answers. What reasons or examples does the journalist give? d Look at the completed chart above. In pairs. say... 
...if you think it is true for you - and if not, why not? ...if you think it is true for other people you know (your brothers and sisters, friends. etc.) 
9 WRITING > p.113 Writing A description of a person. Write a description of a friend you know well. 
4 

 INTRODUCTION a Look at the photos. Describe Jenny and Rob. 
O 
Iniciar sesi6n 
Meeting the parents 
b el) 28))) Watch or listen to Jenny and Rob talking. Complete the gaps. jenny Zielinski and Rob Walker work for a'  called New York24seven. She's American and he's   Rob came to New York a few I  ago. He had met Jenny when she went to  on a work trip. They gor on very well. and he was offered a job for a month in 5  Lacer he was offered a  job Jenny helped Rob  an apartment. and they are enjoying life in the USA, although Rob misses his friends and s PBritish and American English apartment = American English fiat = British English 
2 IMP REACTING TO WHAT PEOPLE VIUL SAY a fit 290 .1i ch or listen to Jenny introducing Rob to her parents. What bad news does Rob have for fenny? What good news does Jenny have for her parents? pBritish and American English mom = American English mum = British English b Watch or listen again and mark the sentences T (true) or F (false). Correct the F sentences. I Rob left the chocolates at the office. 2 Rob's desk is usually very tidy. 3 It's the second time that Rob has met Jenny's parents. 4 Sally has prepared a big dinner. 5 jenny's new job is Managing Director. 6 Jenny is going to be Rob's manager. 
4 

Look at some extracts from the conversation. Can you remember any of the missing words? Watch or listen and check. I Jenny Don't forget the chocolates. Rob OK Oh  Jenny I don't  forgot them? Rob I think they're stilt on my desk. Jenny  kidding. 
it. Don't tell me you 
2 Jenny Morn, I'm reaUy sorry - we bought you some chocolates, but we left them at the office. Sally what a _  mind. 3 Jenny But I also have some good news. Sally  ? What's that? 4 Sally So you've got a promotion/ fantastic, Harry That's great  5 Salty Let's go and have dinner. Jenny What a  ideal d Qi 31 Watch or listen and repeat the phrases in the chart below. Copy the rhythm and intonation. REACTING TO WHAT PEOPLE SAY 
What you say when you hear... 
something surprising You're kidding. I don't believe it. 
something interesting Really? 
some good news 
How fantastic! Than great news! VVhat a great ideal 
some bad news 
Oh nol What a pity. Never. mind. 
"0 How+ adjective, What + noun We often use How + adjective or What + noun to respond to what people say. How interesting! How awful! How amazing! What a pity? What a good idea! what ternbie news! 
e Practise the dialogues in c with a partner. f LI >. Communication How awful! How fantastidA p.104 B p.109. 
111 
4 
I•1 HARRY FINDS OUT MORE ABOUT ROB 
a fp 34 Watch or listen to the after dinner conversation. l Jot. ;II, evening end well or badly? b Watch or listen again and answer the questions. 1 What university did Jenny go to? 2 Is Harry impressed by Rob's job% Why (not)? 3 What does Harry like doing in his free time? 4 Who are most of the photos in the dining room of? Who are Miles Davis. John Coltrane, and Wynton Marsalis? 6 What surprises Harry about Rob? c Look at the Social English phrases. Can you remember any of the missing words? WI English phrases Harry How do you your career? Rob Not  I'm more of a writer. Rob Oh, you know, interviews, reviews, Woe that... Rob I   i like photography. Harry That's most of them are of Jenny. Harry How  Rob Well, he's a really nice  Harry Go sonl 
d 330 Watch or listen and complete the phrases. e Watch or listen again and repeat the phrases. How do you say them in your language? 
a 
Can you...? react to good news, bad news, unexpected - news, and interesting news introduce yourself and other people use phrases which give you time to think. e.g. you know. ( mean, etc. 


WHAT ARE THEY LIKE? 
a Complete the delinit ions with the adject i affectionate 11..i.lawl aggressive ambitious anxious charming cornet:* independent moody selfish sociable stubby .1 1 &Ph people think about (helmets es and nut about other people. 2 t3 person always wants to win. 3   children behave badly because they are given everything they want. 4 An  person gets angry quickly and likes fighting and arguing. S _ people have an attractive personaliq and make people like them. 6 A person has common sense and is practical. 7 A person is friendly and enjoys being with other people. 8  people are often worried or stressed. 9 A person is happy one minute and sad the next, and is often bad-tempered. 10 _ _ people like doing th ings on their own. without help. II A person likes giving orders to other people. 12 An person shows that they love or like people very much. 13 A person thinks that someone loves another person more than them. or wants what other people have. 14 A person can he easily hurt or offended. 15 An person wants to be successful in life. 16 A person is someone who you can trust or depend on. 17 A person doesn't like obeying rules. 18 A person never changes his (or her) opinion or attitude about something. b f1d234 Listen and check. c Cover the definitions and look at the adjectives. Remember the definitions. 
2 OPPOSITES 
4, 
VOCABULARY BANK 
N. latch the adjectives and their opposites. 
hardworkingoxl trek mean outgoing self-confident NU; kolatit.l.mit stupid talkative k 
Opposite 
clever generous insecure lazy quiet shy b 1,020 Listen and check. Then cover the opposites and test yourself. c With a partner, look at the adjectives again in 1 and 2. Do you think they are positive, negative. or neutral characteristics? 
3 NEGATIVE PREFIXES a Which prefix do you use with these adjectives? Put them in the correct column. 
awkikietts friendly honest imaginative kind mature giganized otient reliable remmnsible selfish =skive Sociable tidy 
un-/clis• unambitious 
inb i•/in• 
b 4/250 Listen and check. Which of the new adjectives has a positive meaning? c Cover the columns. Test yourself. 
413 False friends Some words in English are very similar to words in other languages, but have different meanings. Sensible looks very similar to sensible in Spanish and French, but in fact in English it means someone who has common sense and is practical. The Spanish French word sensible translates as sensitive in English (to describe a person who is easily hurt). Sympathetic does not mean the same as sympatycrny in Polish or sempatik in Turkish (which mean nice. friendly). In Engtish, sympathetic means a person who understands other people's feelings, e.g. My best friend was very sympathetic when failed my exam fast week. 

