trying to cut down at the moment. 
1 VOCABULARY food and cooking a Do the quiz in pairs. 
FLIOD QUIZ 
Can you think of...? ONE red fruit. ONE yellow fruit. ONE green fruit TWO kinds of food that some people are allergic to THREE kinds of food that come from milk FOUR vegetables that you can put in a salad FIVE containers that you can buy food in six things that people sometimes have for breakfast 
> p.152 Vocabulary Bank Food and cooking. c f1040 Listen to !hese common adjectives to describe food. Do you know what they mean?Then say one kind of food which we often use with each adjective. 
fresh frozen low-fat raw spicy takeaway tinned 
2 PRONUNCIATION short and long vowel sounds a Look at the eight sound pictures. What are the words and sounds? What part of the symbol tells you that a sound is long? 
squid chicken spicy grilled 
beef steamed beans breakfast 
prawns salmon lamb cabbage 
margarine carton 
jar warm 
3 LISTENING & SPEAKING 
FOOD & EATING 
1 Is there any food or drink that you couldn't live without? How often do you eat/drink it? 2 Do you ever have a ready-made food? b takeaway food? What kind? 3 What's your favourite a fruit? b vegetable? Are there any that you really don't like? 4 When you eat out do you normally order meat, fish, or vegetarian? 5 What food do you usually eat a when you're feeling a bit down? b before doing sport or exercise? c before you have an exam or some important work to do? 
a 406listen to five people talking. Each person is answering one of the questions in Food & Eating above. Match each speaker with a question. 
sausages roast chocolate box 4 Speaker A Speaker D Speakers Speaker E 6 lIck raw fork Speaker C j boiled salt b Listen again and make notes about their answers. Compare with a partner. 7 41. cook sugar mushrooms food c Ask and answer the questions with a partner. 8IJ cucumber beetroot fruit duck What do you have in common? 
b Look at the words in each list. Cross out the word which doesn't have the sound in the sound picture. c Listen and check. d > p.166 Sound Bank. Look at the typical spellings of the sounds in a. 

4 READING a Are the foods in the list carbohydrates or proteins? With a partner, think of four more kinds of food for each category. 
cake chicken pasta salmon 
b With a partner, answer the questions below with either carbohydrates or proteins. What kind of food do you think it is better to cat...? • for lunch if you have an important exam or meeting • for breakfast • for your evening meal • if you are feeling stressed c Look at the title of the article. What do you think it means? Read the article once to find out, and to check your answers to b. d Read the article again. Then with a partner, say in your own words why the following people are mentioned. Give as much information as you can. 
I Dr Paul Clayton 2 people on diets 3 schoolchildren 4 Paul and Terry 5 nightclub owners in Bournemouth e Find adjectives in the article for the verbs and nouns in the list. What's the difference between the two adjectives made from stress? 
38% 
O 

We live In a stressful world, and daily life can sometimes make us feel tired, stressed, or depressed. Some people go to the doctor's for help, others try alternative therapies. but the place to find a cure could be somewhere completely different: in the kitchen. rir Paul Clayton, a food expert from Middlesex University. says St The brain is affected by what you eat and drink, just like every other part of your body. Certain types of food contain substances which affect how you think and feel: For example. food which is high in carbohydrates can make us feel more relaxed. It also makes us feel happy. Research has shown that people on diets often begin to feel a little depressed after two weeks because they are eating fewer carbohydrates. On the other hand. food which is rich in protein makes us feel awake and focused. Research has shown that schoolchildren who eat a high-protein breakfast often do better at school than children whose breakfast is lower in protein. Also. eating the right kind of meal at lunchtime can make a difference if you have an exam in the afternoon or a business meeting where you need to make some quick decisions. In an experiment for a BBC TV programme two chess players, both former British champions, had different meals before playing each other. Paul had a plate of prosciutto and salad (full of protein from the red meat), and his opponent Terry had pasta with a creamy sauce (full of carbohydrate). In the chess match Terry felt sleepy. and took much longer than Paul to make decisions about what moves to make. The experiment was repeated several times with the same result. Another powerful mood food could become a secret weapon in the fight against crime. In Bournemouth in the south of England. where late-night violence can be a problem, some nightclub owners have come up with a solution. They give their clients free chocolate at the end of the night. The results have been dramatic, with a 60% reduction in violent incidents. Why does chocolate make people less aggressive? First. it causes the brain to release feet-good chemicals called endorphins. It also contains a lot of sugar, which gives you energy, and can help stop late-night tiredness turning into aggression. These two things, together with a delicious taste, make chocolate a powerful mood changer. 
stress (noun) (x2) relax (verb) wake (verb) sleep (verb) power (noun) violence (noun) oil (noun) 
f Ask and answer the questions with a partner. I What time of day do you normally eat protein and carbohydrates? How do they make you feel? 2 How often do you cat chocolate? Does it make you feel happier? 3 After reading the article, is there anything you would change about your eating habits? 
Mood food — what the experts say • Blueberries and cocoa can raise concentration levels for up to five hours. • Fbod that is high in protein helps your brain to work more efficiently. • For relaxation and to sleep better, eat carbohydrates. • Dark green vegetables (e.g. cabbage and spinach) and oily fish (e.g. salmon) eaten regularly can help to fight depression. 

RESTAURANTS 
1 How often do you eat out? 2 What's your favourite...? a kind of food (French. Italian, etc.) b restaurant dish 3 How important are these things to you in a restaurant? Number them 1-4 (1- the most important). 1111 the food I the service the atmosphere I the price 4 Have you ever tried English food? What did you think of it? 
b 407* Read the text about Steve Anderson. Then listen to Part I of an interview with him, and number the photos in the order he mentions them. 
c Listen again. Why does he mention each thing? d 4030 Now listen to Part 2 and answer the questions. I What does he say is the best and worst thing about running a restaurant? 2 What's the main difference between British and Spanish customers? 3 What kind of customers does he find difficult? 4 How does he think eating habits in Spain are changing? e What about you? Answer the questions with a partner. I What was your favourite food when you were a child? 2 Is there anything that you like / don't like cooking? 3 In your country, when people eat out would they normally tell the chef what they really think about the food? 4 Do you know anyone who is a 'difficult customer' in restaurants? 
Ifs 
Id 2 
O 
STEVE ANDERSON has always had a passion for food. He was first taught to cook by his mother, who is half Burmese. After studying physics at university. he got a holiday job helping on a cookery course in Italy. where he met several famous chefs. One of them. Alastair Little. later employed him as a trainee chef. Two years later he moved to Va!enria in Spa;n and opened a restaurant. Se,Xereo, 
I 

6 GRAMMAR present simple and continuous, action and non-action verbs a Mop) Listen again to some of the things Steve said. the form of the verb he uses. nQ I This week for example cook / I'm cooking nearly every day. We usually dose are usually closing on Sundays and Mondays. but this Monday is a public holiday. 2 The British always say are saying that everything is lovely. 3 Actually, I think pnler I arn preferring that honesty, because it helps us to know what people like. 4 Unfortunately.I chink they get ) they're gating worse. People cal I are eating more unhealthily. b With a partner. say why you think he has chosen each form. c 1• p.132 Grammar Bank 1A. Learn more about the present simple and the present continuous, and practise them. d Make questions to ask your partner with the present simple or continuous. Ask for more information. 
On a typical day - What J usually have for breakfast? - drink Coke or fizzy drinks? How many glasses (drink a day? - Where I usually have lunch? - What / usually have for lunch during the week? - ever cook? What 1 make? - prefer eating at home or eating out? 
7 SPEAKING 
At the moment / nowadays - j need to buy any food today? - j want anything to eat right now? What? - j take vitamins or food supplements at the moment? - !try to cut down on anything at the moment? - 1 the diet in your country) get better or worse? 
nosesapor WHAT DO YOU THINK? 1 Men are better cooks than women. 2 Both boys and girls should learn to cook at school. 3 Cheap restaurants usually serve bad food. 4 On a night out with friends. where and what you eat isn't important. 5 Not all fast food is unhealthy. 6 Every country thinks that their cuisine is the best in the world. 
a !Lola Listen to two people discussing sentence I. Who do you agree with more, the man or the woman? Why? b 140 Listen to the phrases in the Useful language box. Copy the intonation. 
pUseful language: Giving your opinion (1) I agree. rm not sure. For example.. I don't agree. (I think) it depends. In my opinion... 
c In small groups. say what you think about sentences 2-6. Try to usc the Useful language phrases. 

Food and cooking 
1 FOOD 
a Match the words and pictures. Fish and seafood 1 crab krxh prawns r/ =SW'S I/IA .1.. 0:11  salmon • .zeni:nt• squid .skmd. tuna • I jt1:11A Meat beef hid chicken '1 fol, duck lamb-um pork n,:t Fruit antheeeta Hes aubergine (Am E egg' beetroot 'hi: cabbage ka: hie; cherries "11,•,. courgette k ;el (AmE zucchini) cucumber 'kju:k grapes green he. lemon msigi o vnitnt. melon siliebn. peach -mat pear pc., raspberries red mpper b 402 ))) Listen and check. c Are there any things in the list that you...? a love b hate c have never tried 
d Are there any other kinds of fish, meat, or fruit and vegetables that are very common in your country? 
El' 
1%1 
4 
VOCABULARY BANK 
2 COOKING a Match the words and pictures. 
du 4 boiled roast ENISI baked her kt 
grilled unit! fried loud steamed 't.t entti 
b 0130 Listen and check. c How do you prefer these things Co be cooked? 
eggs 
chicken 
potatoes j fish 
I) Phrasal verbs Learn these phrasal verbs connected with food and diet. : eat out a lot because rotten dont have time to cook. (= eat in restaurants) 1Th trying to cut down on coffee at the moment. Pm only having one cup at breakfast. (= have less) The doctor told me I had very high cholesterol and that I should completely cut out all high-fat cheese and dairy products from my diet. (= eliminate) 
4 p.4 
