The vignette about Seattleites in Shanghai contains an important kernel of truth
about urban development. It suggests that learning takes place in the heads of
people who care about and take action to affect the cities where they live. This
is the essence of city learning. The central concept to be explored extensively in
this book is unlike organizational learning where new knowledge is captured,
recorded and shared in line with mission goals and often a corporate bottom line.
The nature of city learning is more closely akin to collective learning, but, as
recognized in the substantial bodies of literature built up over the post-war period
in both organizational and collective learning, cities are places that are more
open, more loosely organized, and more riven with cross-currents of social,
economic and political interests than most firms, knowledge-intensive organizations
and even associations with broadly shared goals.
“Why did you spend US$25,000 apiece on those two 28-
year-olds to come here to visit Shanghai?” I asked the Vice
President of Boeing about the youngsters on the study tour
from Seattle. The VP didn’t bat an eye. “It’s the best
training money can buy. They get to know their customers,
the Chinese, and we get to know ourselves, the Seattleites.
When we get back to Seattle, we can pick up a phone to
call the city or county or Microsoft, and the person on the
line is someone we have a relationship with.”
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
And yet, the most successful of cities, the innovators, reformers and survivors
in the competitive race for talent and economic power, exhibit a pattern of deliberate
and systematic acquisition of knowledge. Good practices in successful cities
offer short-cuts. Cape Town and Buenos Aires drew on the waterfront renewal
experience of Baltimore and London. Da Nang took lessons from Japan in conversion
and regulation of urban land. Regional centers in Rajasthan in the north of
India are following lessons of infrastructure expansion and business readiness that
peer cities developed in central and southern India. Amman, Jordan is studying
the many experiments in decentralized governance from other parts of the world,
even outside the Middle East. These examples arise from direct city exchange.
We shall see that the most active of learning cities also develop mechanisms
to store, spread and verify newly acquired ideas and apply them to solve local
problems. How do they get into these circumstances? Are all learning cities
successful and all successful cities learners? This book explores these and other
questions that are now arising as cities emerge in this century more prominent
in global trade and national standing.
We cannot go very far either without asking, what is learning? In its simplest
form, learning is acquiring new knowledge. This book makes the point that cities
learn as part of their governance function, but often learning is informal or technical
and sometimes even off the governance radar screen altogether. Learning
and knowledge acquisition come about almost as a by-product of running a city.
Yet learning is qualitatively different from urban governance.
Learning can be straightforwardly linear and mystifyingly complex. In one
recent configuration, MacFarlane’s idea of “assemblages,” groups of like-minded
individuals, like slum dweller advocates, share an ethos that is bundled up in
one city and transferred elsewhere by dedicated slum advocates working in other
cities (MacFarlane, 2010). Practitioners internalize the ethos and apply it to their
own city. Janice Perlman’s core idea of mega-cities represents another point on
a spectrum of learning where knowledgeable practitioners share and develop
ideas of best practice (Perlman, 1987). These are both useful and important kinds
of learning, but not the kind explored in this book.
The learning of cities is also to be distinguished from the emerging consensus
about cities and urbanization that we receive from such influential thinkers as
Geddes, Mumford, Castells, Hall and Glaeser. Our focus is how cities learn, as collective
units, not on what is received wisdom about cities and policies that are
then synthesized and adopted by a wider community of scholars and practitioners.
Learning cities depend upon clusters of people in close exchange of ideas. This
is one of the mechanisms that produced the Triumph of the City (2011) so
eloquently articulated by Edward Glaeser. But while Glaeser highlights the chains
of innovative entrepreneurs embedded in cities, Beyond Smart Cities focuses on
4 The changing place of cities in the urban age
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
collective learning across public, private and civic networks that function as public
goods. Because they provide the context for these networks, cities are the fulcrum
upon which policies can help to leverage learning to achieve innovation and
change. But most cities have been lethargic about the machinery of learning,
merely providing a passive matrix in which exchanges take place. Cities could play
a more proactive and productive role in encouraging and expanding networks,
filling in key gaps, identifying weak spots, and most of all mobilizing new
membership from the ranks of young talent, both native and global.
This book sees city learning as a collective process, which always starts with
discovery by individuals. The critical distinction is that individuals begin to learn
together. The collective process involves subjective exchanges of values and perceptions,
leading to validation and eventual adoption of new ideas by wider groups,
such as NGOs, neighborhoods, business communities, public officials, and many
more. In contrast to MacFarlane’s packaged ethos, learning cities create a common
understanding rooted in widely shared values. Thus learning takes place on
several levels. On one level is the superficial acquisition of new ideas by a businessman,
a city official, a neighborhood activist, picked up by observing the way something
works in a city. At another level, learning involves the willing sharing of values
that get internalized on the basis of trust. Later in the book, the idea of a milieu
of trust will be used to describe environments where this learning takes place.
We shall see also that transmission of ideas, and the values behind them, occurs
close to or nearly simultaneously with innovation. The acceptance of the idea
itself in learning is a form of innovation. When this is accomplished at city level—
in the way taxation is applied, or commercial interests are incorporated into development
plans, or a parking meter system is adopted, or neighborhood preferences
are heard—breakthroughs are made in policy or in the innovative application of
a practice or technology.
Smart cities and learning
The popular literature and current trends in Europe and the US about global
talent and knowledge economies advertise the promise of competitiveness and
economic growth in so-called smart cities. Yet some smart cities succeed better
than others; some cities low down on the IQ list achieve great things. Building
up a knowledge economy of highly educated talent, high-tech industries and
pervasive electronic connections are only the trappings of smartness and cannot
guarantee the outcomes that policy makers hope to achieve. Though global talent
and seamless connections are important, they can also amount only to the dressing
of a pauper in prince’s clothing.
Overview 5
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
To achieve the real promise of smart cities—that is, to create the conditions
of continuous learning and innovation that has led cities like Seattle, Barcelona,
Bilbao and Curitiba to keep pace with economic change—cities need something
more. This book aims to understand what is below the surface in these places, to
examine the mechanisms which are effective in the way open institutions like
cities learn, to identify different levels (I will call them “orders”) of learning, and
to explore ways to connect knowledge communities together to accelerate
change.
Learning far and near
In a recent presentation about New York’s PlaNYC, Mayor Bloomberg stated
that his team
drew on the experiences of Berlin for our renewable energy and green-roof policies:
from Hong Kong, Shanghai and Delhi for our transit improvements; from Copenhagen
for our pedestrian and cycling upgrades; from Bogota for our plans for Bus Rapid
Transit; and from Los Angeles and Chicago for our plan to plant one million trees.
(United Cities and Local Governments, 2010: 1)
New York is not alone. Seattle has been visiting other cities every year since
1993 to benchmark, build relationships, and capture best practice. Seattle’s Trade
Development Alliance, born out of the Chamber of Commerce, is a dedicated
agency to keep Seattle at the cutting edge. But the real secret of Seattle’s learning
is not just finding new ideas. The productive secret, as the Boeing executive
recounted, is forming relationships that are conducive to collective learning.
Though Seattle is a recognized leader in learning, hundreds of cities around
the world are now engaged in the learning process. Large cities everywhere stand
astride the most critical arenas in this century. On a global plane, cities are a
platform where the fortunes of nations are decided in a globally competitive
environment. More and more, the products of city economies are tradeable,
meaning that back-office services like hospital accounts in Manchester or design
coding for Texas Instruments are handled on the other side of the globe.
These examples represent shifts in the locus of production and a sharp increase
everywhere in the stakes for cities to win a race for investments and global talent.
These shifts also mean that cities know they must understand their competitors
and outperform them in order to move ahead. The exchange of knowledge
between cities is part of this understanding and is now taking off in leaps and
bounds. Cities can get new knowledge in dozens of ways. Some of the most
important are commercial, internal development and exchange with other cities.
6 The changing place of cities in the urban age
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
Buy it
Some cities, like Bogota, San Salvador and Amman, have turned to a commercial
source of knowledge that is developed from international practice, complemented
with local data, adapted to local circumstances and packaged for city
customers, often the chamber of commerce or more specialized business group.
The Monitor Group, McKinsey, Bearing Point, and many other consulting firms
offer these services. The analytical work is useful and often of high quality. Some
firms aim to be inclusive in the process, taking pains to expose clients to the
assumptions and analytical exercise. But often the process is divorced from the
day–to-day business of the intended beneficiaries. Key players who must understand
and implement the many parts of a typical plan are not involved in working
through the strategy.
Worse still, many parts of what must become a functioning whole—that is,
the core leadership of a city—are not engaged in working through the discovery.
Regulatory bodies, issue-oriented neighborhood groups, local investors and
businesses and public officials all have to be a part of uncovering new truth. The
Monitor product for Bogota included high-quality data and useful analysis, but
ended up with many familiar recommendations in support of clusters in such
well-known and already established industries as floristry, electronics, health care
and tourism. The knowledge packaging includes recommendations which are also
predictable, such as relaxing the regulatory process, streamlining decision making,
setting up dedicated agencies to cut transaction costs and urging a marketing
of the city brand. And while these may be analytically correct, they cannot
themselves produce a magic sauce that results in a wholesale transformation.
Without involvement of key stakeholders in the discovery, the creation, the deep
and sometimes intensely personal exchange of values, analytics and recommendations
often remain only artifacts, having objective truth but not personal
conviction.
Invent it at home
Many cities have found ways to innovate by applying already known, locally found
or invented techniques to improve an existing process, say taxation or licensing
for businesses, or delivery of a new service, like web-based transactions in public
business. Curitiba is perhaps one of the early leaders in local invention. A bus
rapid transit system was built up on the basis of a social convention about
controlling the automobile in the city. A local institutional genius was born
in Curitiba. The main elements of the bus system were conceived in Curitiba’s
Overview 7
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
planning institute. From the beginning, decades before other cities caught on,
while most cities were still stuck on underground metros, the planners in Curitiba
aimed to run their system like a surface metro on tires.
Local planners in Curitiba, many with experience in Europe and other
international cities, contributed their sometimes exotic knowledge to innovative
applications, including the layout of rights of way, dedicated lanes, building
densities along the bus routes, revenue sharing of operators, and a host of other
clever ideas that make Curitiba a working laboratory of innovation. The learning
underlying these innovations was derived from local experts applying knowledge
gained from work and travel abroad, and the climate that helped incubate new
ideas and nurture them to fruition is a critical part of Curitiba’s success.
“Foreign exchange”
Seattle has created a process of learning that ventures out to other cities in an
organized exploration of best practice and benchmarking for lessons that can be
brought back home. The study missions of Seattle are elaborate, highly organized,
dedicated visits organized on a yearly basis by the Trade Development Alliance,
a dependency of the Greater Seattle Chamber of Commerce. The study missions
engage up to 100 business and civic leaders in the greater Seattle area. Their
objectives are many, but one key overarching objective made explicit in the ethos
of Seattle is to build relationships internally. As participants visit peer cities, they
broaden their understanding of the position of Seattle vis-à-vis the visited city,
its region and state, and indeed, increasingly, the entire global context of urban
economies.
Participants on the missions include the top leadership figures of the city and
county along with utilities, ports, universities, private firms, and NGOs. Not all of
the delegates are senior officials, as indicated by the high-level Boeing executive
whose vignette opens this chapter.
The heart of the learning experience takes place during the many opportunities
where participants are together; in plenary sessions, in working groups, at
meals, on the bus, when delegates sit for the post-action meeting on the last
day, and even after they have returned home. During these gatherings, they question
and digest what they have seen and heard and exchange perceptions and
opinions with each other. They are able to gain perspective and insight on their
own issues back home.
Above all, the interactive learning style of Seattle’s study missions creates a
personal bond of shared experiences. Participants often spoke long afterwards,
back in Seattle, of the benefits of having participated in a mission. Back home,
8 The changing place of cities in the urban age
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
when placing a phone call to a government agency or business, the advantage
of having had this shared experience and knowing the face of the “person on
the other end of the call” greatly facilitated understanding and the speed of
doing business (Trade Development Alliance, 2001).
The rise of city learning
At a global level, cities are forming a thick and growing web-work of ties that
constitutes an underground economy of knowledge. A survey conducted in
preparation for this book shows that city-to-city exchanges—i.e., technical visits
of professional practitioners seeking new knowledge and best practice—reach
thousands, perhaps tens of thousands, of visits each year across the globe.
In both global and local arenas, proactive cities are developing a dynamic of
internal leadership that involves acquiring outside knowledge, building an internal
capacity to learn, and exchanging ideas about policies and practices in order
to validate present performance, benchmark against others, and shape long-term
strategic change.
It is not surprising that cities should be entering a global hunt for knowledge.
It can be (and has been) argued that the very raison d’être of cities is that they
facilitate exchange of all kinds. More to the point, in a globalized economy where
knowledge plays an increasing role, cities are the crucibles where linkages are
made. In turn, linkages are the channels of learning, and learning is a key not
only to good practice, but also to creating wealth and reducing poverty among
the poorest.
The intermediate position of cities puts them between their citizens and the
outside world, mother nation-states and other cities around the globe. In the
coming decades, cities will become increasingly important players in the implementation
of policy, dissemination of knowledge, and creation of wealth. But
while cities have long been seen as central to innovation, they have not been
plumbed for their knowledge-exchange properties until now.
City learning: blind spot in urban innovation and
governance
In-depth studies developed for this volume document recurrent patterns in
making modern transformations. Dozens of cities discussed in this book—from
Barcelona, Spain to San Fernando, Philippines—illuminate a blind spot in conventional
approaches to urban development as well as in the bulk of scholarly
Overview 9
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
literature. Each of the cities scrutinized in this book has sought best practice
abroad and most have achieved important transformations based in part on what
they have learned from others.
Bilbao launched its pursuit of the Guggenheim Museum only 10 years after city
leaders had pondered lessons from other cities around the world about industrial
restructuring. Key leaders in Lima, Peru, long embattled over the role of private
developers, saw in London the magic of private sector contributions—it wasn’t
the money; it was the incentives to partner in public goods. The secret: the public
sector structures a framework for mutually beneficial returns for both public and
private players. That lesson broke a logjam in Lima’s deliberations over large pieces
of infrastructure needed in the city’s metropolitan development. Though these
new configurations didn’t come easily to Bilbao or Lima, the key insights came in
a collective learning process. In these and many other cases, learning has played
a key role, one that has been largely ignored in academic settings, policy circles
and by professional practitioners concerned with competitiveness and innovation.
Indeed, few cities have given serious and systematic thought to both what
and how they learn. A dozen different approaches to urban development, from
regime theory to economic geography, cover pieces of this story. But no one
approach has viewed the modern metropolis as a learning entity, active in
acquiring and processing new knowledge as a part of its governance mechanism.
Not only do cities not pay much attention to learning, their leading agencies often
do not bother to measure their own progress, to evaluate the effectiveness of
visits and other forms of learning, to ask whether knowledge or technology
transfer is meeting city objectives, and to explore whether and how city leadership
and innovation can be improved to meet the many challenges facing the city.
Research for this book over the past five years has developed quantitative data
to address these questions. The findings reveal new patterns about learning and
innovation. For one thing, learning cities tend to be innovative places and vice
versa. They devote more time and resources to acquiring new knowledge and
validating it for application at home. Second, they exhibit patterns in the way
they learn, in acquisition of new knowledge from “external” sources as well as
in internal processing and adaptation of knowledge to local circumstances. Cities
that are serious about learning invent civic processes that facilitate the conversion
of tacit to explicit knowledge. Successful cities like Seattle create opportunities
for internal bonding; for instance, by involving civic and business leadership in a
continuing program of study tours. In doing so, Seattle achieves internal
bonding—as with those young professionals from Boeing—as it harvests a rich
crop of data and best practice.
Patterns are also found in how cities internalize new knowledge. My research
uncovers signature styles of trust and collaboration that characterize a city,
10 The changing place of cities in the urban age
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
particularly in the shape and features of internal networks. These attributes are
critical to converting knowledge to innovations and are important for understanding
how to accelerate learning and make knowledge more useful.
Clouds of trust in the machinery of learning
This book shows that the vital factors for smart cities are informal leadership
networks that I call “clouds of trust.” These are ties of trusted links between and
among key actors in the community. Elected leaders come and go, but business,
civic and youth leaders who are incorporated into ongoing “thinking” about
the city represent an important form of social capital, not just because they bridge
gaps in connectedness or reinforce social norms, as Burt and others suggest (Burt,
2001). They also provide a platform for learning and sustain the threads of
continuity in a place over time.
Qualitative and quantitative data gathered during five years of research from
cities around the world illustrate the mechanisms and the policies that enable
cities to be smart, i.e., to create dense “clouds of trust” to exchange knowledge,
to store it for wider and longer term use, and to convert learning to innovation.
Clouds of trust pervade the machinery of learning (see Figure 1.1).
Later chapters will explore each of four elements that compose the learning
city. Trusting milieu refers to the “ba” atmosphere of which clouds of trust are
emblematic. Institutional process refers to documentation, deliberation, and
discussion of knowledge which is gathered by internal and external mechanisms.
Agency refers to a central office or responsible unit for managing and recording
knowledge. Knowledge gathering is the activity of harvesting ideas from internal
and external sources for adaptation as innovations in the city. Networks of
confidence have a direct or indirect impact in each element.
We shall see, for example, that Portland and Turin, two of numerous in-depth
cases explored in later chapters, show intriguing variation in key features of trust
Overview 11
Agency
Trusting milieu
Learning
city
Knowledge gathering Institutional process
Figure 1.1 Schematic diagram of the machinery of city learning
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
networks—shape, “tightness” and the dynamics of network growth. The underlying
theory of networks—along with ideas of embeddedness, of weak and strong
ties and frequency of exchange, of coherence and speed of information—throw
new light on civic action and innovation in cities. Portland and Turin each have to
cope with the advantages and disadvantages of their particular style, one with the
speed but limited bridging of tight homogeneity in membership, the other with
the slow vagaries but rich access to ideas from a diverse membership. This approach
to learning opens a new vista onto the world of competitiveness and innovation.
Smart cities and beyond
Because they provide the context for these networks, cities are the fulcrum upon
which policies can help to leverage learning, and foster innovation and change.
But most cities have been lethargic about the machinery of learning, merely
providing a passive matrix in which exchanges take place. Cities could play a more
proactive and productive role in encouraging and expanding networks, filling in
key gaps, identifying weak spots, and most of all mobilizing new membership
from the ranks of young talent, both native and global.
On the other side of the coin, we examine counter-factual cases of cities that
have learned but then faltered or that have failed to learn at all. It is rare to find
a city that has not glowed with any particular features of learning and still managed
to be innovative. These cases serve to underscore several points. The first
is that the learning process itself is not the be all and end all, not the magic
ingredient of city success that for some reason has been overlooked. Rather, the
message in this book is that the process itself can be ragged. Progress takes place
in fits and starts and sometimes it happens by good fortune. Even strong learners
have run aground for a while. But the evidence of data and the examples in this
book make a strong case for paying attention to learning as a new tool in the
process of urban governance and development.
In this respect, Beyond Smart Cities penetrates a deeper level of the social
and business networks described by Safford (Safford, 2009). Rather than merely
mapping presence on boards and clubs as Safford did brilliantly in the cases of
Youngstown and Allentown (and as many others have done to map different
forms of ties—corporate department members, research teams, email linkages),
the case analysis drills down to the level of confidential trust among individual
players in the planning elites. The resulting data portray fresh pictures of city
coherence. These data add detail to our understanding of how city elites interact,
with consequences for policy to foster competitiveness strategies or recovery after
seismic shifts in the economic landscape.
12 The changing place of cities in the urban age
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
This book shows how networks already operating in most cities are used—
and sometimes misused—to foster and strengthen connections, to achieve
breakthroughs, and to catalyze and convert information and knowledge into a
high-value richness of innovation. Going beyond smart cities means understanding
how cities construct, convert and manipulate the matrix of relationships
that grow naturally in urban environments.
Unlike Woolcock and others who remind us of complex interactions between
macro and micro forms of social capital, the material in this book illustrates the
formation of networks horizontally and in minute detail, and the challenges and
opportunities of shaping and using them in different contexts (Woolcock, 1998).
To achieve smart cities is not merely a matter of improving markets, prices or
incentives. Nor is it a radical alteration in the prevailing ideological schema. The
key step is to facilitate exchange in cities, internally and externally, but above all
to create an atmosphere of trust involving a wide swath of stakeholders. Although
the rest might not take care of itself, with the right policies cities and citizens in
them hungry for new knowledge can speed up the exchange and make it more
efficient.
Policy relevance—why don’t cities learn?
A number of cities in the developing world have implemented innovations over
the past few decades drawing on systematic learning; i.e., deliberate and continuing
acquisition of knowledge often gained from outside sources on topics
such as bus rapid transit, historic preservation downtown, participatory planning,
and neighborhood upgrading. Cities in OECD countries have also achieved major
transformations, including economic turnarounds and whole new identities.
Scores if not hundreds of other innovations and achievements are recorded in
such places as the UN-Habitat Best Practice awards.1 But very many large cities,
the vast majority of the roughly 1000 cities on the planet that have populations
of more than a quarter of a million, lag behind or are bogged down. Why do the
few successes not spread more rapidly? Why don’t cities learn?
The book explores a half dozen reasons why cities do not learn—small city
size, adverse policy and phase changes, to name a few—and suggests what can
be done to expand and speed up learning. For instance, getting the most out of
networks is a matter of managing tight and loose bonds and fostering intersections,
for instance the public and private, the marginal and civic. But management
is not just a matter of public policy. It is also a matter of private will, of businesses
and corporations as well as marginal communities together with local policy
makers recognizing mutual self-interest and joining a wider circle of stakeholders
Overview 13
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
to engage in trusting relationships that are the gold standard of learning cities.
The larger institutional task is a matter of growing a learning environment. This
line of inquiry is now all the more important as cities begin to take on more
important roles in the global economy.
Significance
These questions are important and indeed are arising in part because urbanization
on the planet has not only completed a demographic transition, but also because
big and intermediate-size cities now number around 1000. These places are
likely to play an increasingly significant role in climate change, sustainable
development, and poverty alleviation. Most local governments are involved in
construction, land use and local transit regulations—all important determinants
of sustainable development and greenhouse gases. Cities are the most immediate
point of contact for more than a billion people living in slums.
Furthermore, Polese and Freire (Polese and Freire, 2003) have shown that
improvements on service delivery in cities can lead to 10 to 20 percent increases
in city economic output. Since city economies typically account for 40 percent of
national GDP, any improvement in efficiency can have beneficial impacts at the
national as well as the local level. A better understanding of how cities learn
promises to open new pathways to speed up innovation and reform.
The story ahead
The material ahead is organized in four parts. The first sets the stage by reviewing
the present and recent past of urban development on the planet. The key message
here is about the stirring among cities following a long history of gradual experimentation
with horizontal cooperation. Chapter 3 turns to published record
as a rich source of clues about learning, creativity and innovation, particularly as
collective endeavors. The literature helps sharpen the focus on creating a climate
for innovation.
In Part II we take stock of how much exchange is now going on between
cities and how this segment of the knowledge economy relates to the growing
body of academic and practitioner literature on innovation and learning. Chapter
4 maps out some of the modalities cities employ in order to learn. A typology
developed in earlier work helps to single out features of proactive learners.
Chapter 5 widens the field of view with data from 50 cities, showing cities “on
the prowl” for knowledge. The survey data also reveal the surprising extent to
14 The changing place of cities in the urban age
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
which cities invest in learning, financing thousands of city-to-city study tours every
year.
Part III drills down to specific cases of proactive learners. These are the focus
of our inquiry: cities that dedicate substantial time, resources, and organizational
structure to acquire new ideas, store knowledge for future use, and convert
knowledge into innovative change. Three groups of proactive cities are explored,
each group exhibiting a slightly different way of going about learning. A signal
idea introduced in this discussion is “clouds of trust,” a characteristic feature of
learning cities that implies a range of behavioral differences in the civic life
of each place.
The common features and qualities that emerge in these cases, along with
recommendations to foster learning and innovation, are discussed in Part IV,
which covers secrets of learning. The evidence and analysis in the previous sections
are richly suggestive of policy directions for nations and cities, along with research
areas for further academic work.
As cities take their place as centers of economic regions, defined in terms of
economic and social interests, they will be the centers that drive global development
in the next century. The opening chapters point to the evidence for this
planetary change. Although it is hard to express the exact balances of national
and regional powers, there is no doubt that the proportions are changing. Cities
are the most rapidly evolving part of a new equation, and their growing
importance in world development will have far-reaching consequences for
international relations and national policy on a whole range of issues.
Data methods and sources
Data sources for this volume arise from many quarters. Extensive and repeated
visits over 30 years have formed a knowledge base about many aspects of urban
development. Extended stays in key cities like Barcelona, Curitiba and Seattle,
plus interviews with leading figures in Amman, Juárez and Bilbao, provided more
focused observations about the role of learning in capacity building. I will also
draw upon information and data from additional cities from past professional
work and from previously published and unpublished articles.
Web-based surveys conducted in 2008 and 2009 produced data on city-to-city
visits as well as insights into the strong demand for learning, the preferences for
learning modalities, and priorities among practitioners for further knowledge in
topical and management areas. A second web-based survey in Seattle provided
hard data and policy insight into the design and impact of peer learning in
Seattle’s city visit program.
Overview 15
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
Research during 2009 as a Senior Fellow for the German Marshall Fund drilled
down into specific practices of four cities—Barcelona, Charlotte, Portland and
Turin, generating quantitative and qualitative detail about the mechanics of
learning, and produced insight into the importance of trust networks.
Note
1 See, for instance, the Dubai International Award for Best Practice, established in 1995.
http://www.unhabitat.org/content.asp?typeid=19&catid=34&cid=160
References
Burt, R. (2001). “Structural holes versus network closure as social capital,” Social capital:
theory and research, in N. Lin, K. Cook and R. S. Burt, Social capital: theory and research
(sociology and economics: controversy and integration series), Aldine de Gruyter, New
York, pp. 31–56.
Glaeser, E. (2011). Triumph of the city. How our greatest invention makes us richer, smarter,
greener, healthier and happier, Penguin, New York.
MacFarlane, C. (2010). Learning the city: translocal assemblage and urban politics, Wiley-
Blackwell, London.
Perlman, J. (1987). “Mega cities and innovative technologies,” CITIES: The International
Journal of Urban Policy, 4 (May), pp. 128–186.
Polese, M. and M. Freire (2003). Connecting cities to macroeconomic concerns. The missing
link, World Bank and National Institute of Economic Research, Washington, DC.
Safford, S. (2009). Why the garden club couldn’t save Youngstown, Harvard University Press,
Cambridge, MA.
Trade Development Alliance (2001). Crossroads 10! (pamphlet), Trade Development Alliance
of Greater Seattle, Seattle.
United Cities and Local Governments (2010). “Michael R. Bloomberg: the importance of
learning from other cities,” United Cities, 1, p. 1.
Woolcock, M. (1998). “Social capital and economic development: toward a theoretical
synthesis and policy framework,” Theory and Society, 27, pp. 151–208.
16 The changing place of cities in the urban age
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
2 The slow emergence of learning cities
in an urbanizing world
Cities have always been the centers of information intensity and resource transformation,
but not always in charge of their own destiny. This brief chapter aims
to set the stage for the story of city learning. It provides the background to
understand the motivation for and scope of learning being undertaken by cities
around the world. The narrative begins in the 19th century but could easily be
extended back in time, for instance, to draw upon the traditions of city-states in
medieval Europe and the emergence of strategic alliances such as the Hanseatic
League. Our perspective is mainly practical, and our starting point will be in the
latter half of the 1800s. This look back at history shows how cities are continuously
encountering forces that have propelled a need for new ideas and solutions.
Increasingly, they find it convenient to band together, and this accretion process
may lead to an entirely new urban age.
An evolution of adaptive learning
The changes that have brought about this acceleration in knowledge seeking
are many. They include rapid increases not only in urban populations, but in the
numbers of large cities as well. In addition, concerns over the environment,
increasing managerial complications, decentralization, and technological
evolution have become mixed in with the forces of globalization. These last global
elements have put cities into a free-for-all, buffeting them about like so many
corks on a global ocean.
Many of the forces at work are in the news every day, but by seeing them in
the context of cities as actors on the global stage, we can glimpse the deeper
and more far-reaching consequences they are precipitating. As they become
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
better learners, cities have also been brought closer together, both North and
South. They have also become more confident actors, politically, economically
and institutionally, and these changes may presage an urban age like that of the
city-states of previous millennia.
We organize our review in three main parts to see the evolution of cities as
learners and exchangers of knowledge. The first part goes back more than a
century to show the roots and long-standing tradition of city-to-city exchange.
After World War II, the global and institutional context changed and a half-dozen
new actors emerged in the globalizing world, making the stakes of change
increasingly important for cities. The third section looks in greater detail at the
development of city-to-city learning, practically a knowledge business, certainly
a hidden economy of exchange. The chapter closes with a look at 10 common
issues—many of which were not on the agenda even a decade ago—that cities
are facing today and in the future.
Early municipalist movement
The earliest traces of city-to-city cooperation in the way we understand it today
date to the mid-19th century: European mayors’ conventions and regional unions
of cities were common as early as the 1860s (Kozinska-Witt, 2002). The growing
trend of inter-municipal exchange and association was part of a growing municipalist
movement that lasted into the first decades of the 20th century. The
movement centered mainly on European cities but drew reformers and professionals
from the United States—the 19th century’s “information superhighway”
(Ewen and Hebbert, 2007)—to learn from successful models. The assertion of cities
as politically, culturally and technologically relevant actors on the international
scene was precipitated by numerous trends.
First, the demographic and economic characteristics of the era placed cities
at the center of service provision for the European masses. The urban population
of Europe grew roughly sixfold between 1800 and 1910, and industrializing cities
overflowed with migrants.1 Overpopulation put a serious strain on infrastructure
and commodity resources, prompting a concerted government focus on service
provision. Under the intellectual influence of the Fabians (a splinter group of
the English Labor party whose mantra favored the public operation of essential
local services),2 many cities had municipalized services and needed to look to their
peers for knowledge sharing and best practices.
A growth in trade networks, whose international conferences sought to share
industry know-how, also contributed to the technocratic slant of the movement.
Numerous esoteric, knowledge-sharing networks of municipal actors sprung up
18 The changing place of cities in the urban age
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
at the end of the 19th century—on everything from fire safety to urban planning
(Ewen and Hebbert, 2007). The interest in learning from global experience
complemented municipal networking: statistical conferences in Paris in 1885 and
1889 demonstrated the use of data in understanding what was really being
accomplished by municipal service delivery (Hietala, 1987).
The municipal movement was also characterized by a push for political relevance
and identity and was closely tied with the growth of communist and socialist
political rhetoric (Dogliani, 2002). An economic depression sweeping Europe in
the 1870s spurred the creation of mass people’s parties and saw the democratization
of the industrial proletariat and urban middle class. These events also
led to the extension of voting rights, bringing “many local authorities under the
control of left-wing or radical parties” (Dogliani, 2002: 574).
With the ambition of establishing grandiose social programs, local socialist
authorities were often too inexperienced or underfunded to provide sufficient
social services. Some were inhibited by higher orders of government, which traditionally
financed public services at the local level. As larger towns under socialist
governance discovered the need for large-scale projects to be properly managed,
monitored and funded, demand grew for capable administrators. European
socialists therefore set up national and regional federations of town and provincial
councilors to exchange experience and information. The trend expanded
to national federations of towns themselves around the turn of the century
(Kozinska-Witt, 2002).
Another inertial push for the municipal movement was the growth of municipal
institutions, categorized by Ewen and Hebbert into groups of politicians,
administrators and technicians. In 1904, the British Committee for the Study
of Municipal Institutions (BCSMI) was founded. The group launched visits to
Germany, the US and Scandinavia, seeking to learn how the world’s most effective
cities conducted public programs.3 Around this time, cities all over Europe
sponsored self-funded study tours and politicians visited their municipal counterparts
to debate policy in “typical ‘donor’ and ‘recipient’ relationships” (Ewen
and Hebbert, 2007: 8). The inter-municipal activity generated by these actors,
complemented by academic studies focused on the inchoate social sciences,
constituted an “emergence of a common international knowledge-base” which
supported “paradiplomatic relations between municipalities in an age of doomed
politics” (Ewen and Hebbert, 2007: 9).
The slow emergence of learning cities 19
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
City links as institutions
The formation of the International Union of Local Authorities (IULA) in 1913
began a trajectory of institutionalization of the municipal movement which is
continuing today.4 In the first two decades of the 20th century, the “peripatetic
municipal networks” of the movement splintered into clubs and associations
which disseminated knowledge to its subscribed members (Ewen and Hebbert,
2007: 9). The IULA stepped in to catch these fragments and facilitate all urban
international relations. The nature of city-to-city relationships in the 1920s and
1930s was shaped by the increased institutionalization of city networks and the
enhanced role of cities on the international stage.
Leading up to World War I, cities started to embrace diplomatic agendas and
used city-to-city relationships to assert their international relevance. Cross-city
“reciprocal visits” between national garden city associations became common,
spurred by “lurking fear” that other countries would learn from and surpass
their neighbors in industrial and, later, military supremacy (Hardy, 1991: 194).
The notion of the “international city” became desirable, too, with municipalities
portrayed as the nerve center for public service associations—like the post,
telegraph, transport and hygiene sectors—and representing a new way forward
in international relations (Gaspari, 2002).
The Great War and its crippling of Europe critically affected cities’ roles and
interactions. “Cities bore the primary responsibility for meeting the basic needs
of refugees and the resident population: food, sanitation, and housing. It forced
co-operatives, trade unions and local authorities to collaborate more closely to
ensure that municipalities functioned as the primary centers for service provision”
(Dogliani, 2002: 585).
IULA meetings and the knowledge exchange they facilitated were also based
on increasingly technical content. This shift was partially representative of the
perception of cities as integral to social reform and the democratization of
economic and human resources. But after World War I it was also an agenda
forced upon the IULA by a stubborn League of Nations, which saw inter-municipal
interaction as encroaching on national diplomacy. Nation-states themselves were
not pleased with such cooperation either, as evidenced by the dissolution of Italy’s
association of municipalities in 1925 (Gaspari, 2002). But after World War I there
also emerged a prime opportunity for city-to-city relationships. The IULA, which
except for the war years had seen impressive growth in attendance since its
inception,5 became more of a collective of city associations than of individual
cities. This facilitated broader political visibility, supported extensive relationships
with other organizations, and raised IULA membership to its height in 1932
(Dogliani, 2002).
20 The changing place of cities in the urban age
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
World War II and redefining municipal cooperation
Leading up to and during World War II, there was a lull in the city-to-city interaction
of municipal organizations. After the war, the IGCTPA (International
Garden City and Town Planning Association) congresses marked attempts for cityto-
city relationships to “restore and strengthen links between nations” (Hardy,
1991: 197). The role of cities assumed a strong undercurrent of universal brotherhood
and humanity as revived municipal networks led reconstruction efforts while
post-war international politics stumbled slowly to its feet. France and Germany
were particularly active in reaching out across borders and between municipalities.
The Union Internationale des Maires (UIM) was founded in 1947 to foster reconciliation
between them. The municipal movement’s pre-war community, based
around sharing technical expertise and municipal governance, became swept up
in a post-war movement for cultural exchange and understanding.
Seas changing—1950 to the present
The post-war environment was fertile ground for city-to-city exchange for many
reasons, demographic, economic and technological. Before continuing with a narrative
on city–to-city relationships, we turn to examine increasingly global forces
that impinge on cities and their need to know.
First in chronology and importance in this brief retrospective is the global
demographic transition, that is, the massive movement of populations from rural
to urban areas, especially in the global South. In fact, urbanization is best seen
in two phases. The completion of this urban transition has been advertised for
nearly a decade, but the pure growth in city size is only one aspect of demographic
change. A very important corollary is usually overlooked, the increase in the
number of large cities. Among other things, the increase of large cities brings
the urban global North and South closer together, as big cities often have more
in common with each other than with other cities in their mother countries. We
turn first to the flow of migrants to cities and look at the large city implications
later.
The onset of large urban migrations in the modern era came into full swing
in the late 1950s and early 1960s. Migration pressures would come to push newly
independent states to breaking point. The post-war environment brought a global
demand for commodities and booming economies in the US and Europe. Peacetime
trade in commodities and manufactures created demand for labor in cities
around the world. Job opportunities opening up in cities in the 1950s and 1960s
provided early evidence that would begin to demolish the idealistic propositions
The slow emergence of learning cities 21
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
of self-sufficient smallholders living in rural areas. Importantly, to cope with these
pressures, it was central, not local, authorities that took on the task of designers
and providers of solutions.
Though urbanization was changing at very different rates in the major regions
of the world, on the whole urban population doubled between 1950 and 1975
(Table 2.1), overwhelming the capacities of nations, much more so cities, to keep
up with demand for shelter, infrastructure and services. The demographic shifts
were most intense in Latin America. The growth rate of some cities exceeded 7
percent, doubling the populations of many neighborhoods and some whole cities
in a decade. In the end, city populations increased by 100 million people during
this 20-year period.
The focus of policy and development was less on cities than on the role of
national governments, which were, in the words of Urban Development Timeline,
“the main architects and implementers of development in both rural and urban
areas.”6 An early and persistent developmental image was rooted in the Gandhian
notion of a dignified and self-reliant populace spinning cotton and tilling a largely
rural landscape, an image that is reflected in greater and lesser degrees by
national leaders in other emerging states of the Third World, like Mexico, China,
Egypt, (the then) Tanganyika and elsewhere.
Grand schemes fostered by national ministries sought to demonstrate with
iconic projects like Brasilia in Brazil and Chandigarh in India that national
responses were up to the challenges posed by mushrooming cities. The cities
themselves were plaintive bystanders in this demographic transformation. Even
though many tried vainly to address the growing pressures of population increase,
22 The changing place of cities in the urban age
Table 2.1 Urban population size and growth by region
Mid-year population (millions) Growth rate (percent)
Region 1950 1975 2000 2030 1950– 1975– 2000–
1955 1980 2005
World total 751 1543 2862 4899 3.12 2.56 1.92
High-income 359 562 697 1036 2.35 1.37 0.68
countries
Middle- and 392 981 2165 3863 4.17 3.64 2.40
low-income
countries
Source: UNDESA, 2010
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
the control of power remained at the national level. More to the point, cities
were not only bystanders, they were also not engaged in any process of institutional
growth and expanding capacity that might have put them in good stead
to deal with continuing migration.
In 1957, J. F. C. Turner, a young architect from London, was working on lowcost
housing design in Lima. He traveled by car and on foot into the dusty eastern
flanks of the city and saw the front edges of sprawl in the metropolis that still
can be observed today. The shacks housing residents there have now become
the archetypes of self-built shelter around the world. Accompanied by Housing
Ministry officials, Turner was told that the barriadas he was being shown were
growing into the major problem of the city. The solution took the form of homogeneous
rows of sterile public housing located further out in cheap government
land. Turner famously observed that the problems he was shown, the barriadas,
were the solutions, and the solutions, public housing, were really the problems.
The Lima anecdote illustrates many things. Foremost, for the present purposes,
it illustrates that the city had not been cast as a protagonist in the drama. The
Lima squatters whom Turner observed represent perhaps the clearest starting line
in a decades-long struggle over shelter policy, a fight that has been focused on
cities around the world, but for a long time cities have been out of the picture.
Many decades passed before city and neighborhood players were brought into
the formation and implementation of policy solutions. Neighborhoods and cities
feel the pinch, and often they squawked, but property rights have long been the
domain of nations, at least up to the last couple of decades.
Ironically, cities were often blamed as the locus of growing problems. They
were held in scorn as the pace of population growth continually overwhelmed
each generation of policy. National policy in most countries has either ignored
cities, or worse, in developing countries, has long been leery and suspicious of
them. Playing into this dynamic, cities and their leaders were very frequently the
bulwarks of political opposition to the central state. The truth is that central
governments were overwhelmed as well, but for reasons of political power and
the relative weakness of local governments, nations continued to be the principal
providers of solutions and the main sources of knowledge about policy and practice.
In the late 1970s, foundations, non-governmental organizations and universities
were beginning to build a capacity to address urban problems. The Ford
Foundation launched its urban program in the late 1960s. Korea and Thailand
launched research and development institutes patterned after think tanks in the
US and Europe. Major universities either formed urban studies programs or added
development programs to existing ones. In the developed world, horizontal
exchanges began to appear through specialized city-based organizations.
Organizations like the IULA, United Towns, and Sister Cities began to play
The slow emergence of learning cities 23
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
more of a role, but found it hard to keep up with demand for technical assistance.
Local government associations and their federations formed a significant part
of NGO growth from the 1970s onward. Not counting religious and intergovernmental
organizations, the number of NGOs rose precipitously from around
1000 in the early 1970s to more than 26,000 by 1999 (Union of International
Associations, 2011). They were filling a perceived need for mutual assistance and
support. Furthermore, few countries had established national urban strategies to
cope with problems of city growth. A 1974 study found that many early sistercity
relationships formed out of the post World War II aid programs to Western
Europe. The relationships that endured, however, were based on cultural or
educational dimensions that created lasting friendships.
International development assistance organizations began to bring cities as
consultative partners into large-scale projects, but the structure of national power
and Cold War interests in the developing world kept these exchanges at modest
levels in the developed countries. The point is, direct city exchange of the kind
fostered by the IULA, Sister Cities and United Towns operated at a low level of
intensity, often through a single city twinning with another.
Environmental change
The compression of populations in cities inevitably brought environmental change
right into policy makers’ backyards. Though numerous issues were emerging at
once in crowded cities, a rapid and visible decrease in environmental quality was
one of the broadest in scope and most influential in alerting the public to a need
for change. For example, researchers in Asia began to measure the impact of
wood- and coal-fired stoves on indoor air quality and sounded the first alarm
about indoor air pollution. These concerns then opened eyes to a half-dozen other
issues and have evolved today into sustainability, natural hazards preparation,
carbon footprint and climate change.
The case of Curitiba has acquired fame partly because it was among the first
to address environmental issues, largely on its own. Curitiba’s early steps toward
bus rapid transit and its green spaces were based on environmental grounds.
In many cities, poor water quality was the recognized culprit in millions of child
deaths every year. Environmental health arguments added weight to the policy
justification for addressing a wider scope of environmental health issues in
drainage, solid waste and sewerage. But for the most part, despite the fact that
environmental change hit the ground in cities, cities had neither the full range
of powers nor the resources to protect the health of citizens, even though in many
cases cities had the legal obligation to do so.
24 The changing place of cities in the urban age
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
In the US, clean water and clean air legislation corresponded with the growing
awareness of environmental health and sanitation in the developing world. The
global alert sounded by such works as Rachel Carson’s Silent Spring (1962) and
Meadows and colleagues’ Limits to Growth (1972) had an impact on leaders
around the world. These works suggested that even the middle and upper classes
in cities could not escape pervasive environmental change by hiding behind gated
communities.
The institutional lags in this story were a telltale indication of the slow and
muddling response to the problems of the great migrations. Just as cities were burgeoning
toward mega-proportions, the World Bank was busy doubling lending
in agriculture. Its president, McNamara, saw rural poverty as a major problem not
being addressed, but did not see that rural to urban migration would, in a sense,
take care of it even before agricultural output could be increased. To be fair,
McNamara also launched the World Bank’s first urban project, in Dakar in 1972,
and followed it with many more. But the Achilles’ heel of international developmental
assistance was that, because of charter mandates, banks cannot easily lend
directly to cities. Central governments were borrowers, in line with bank charters
that were bound to observe national sovereignty and limits on market risk.
Stockholm and Vancouver
Beginning in 1972, concerns about the environment and cities gave birth to two
landmark events, the Stockholm Conference on the Human Environment in 1972
and the Vancouver UN Habitat Conference on cities in 1976. Urban pressures
became more palpable both for national policy makers and for local city politicians
and managers. The Stockholm conference foresaw a need not just to address
issues of decline in the quality and availability of natural resources, but also
in cultural issues and developmental strategies. Most notably for cities, the
Stockholm conference produced a recommendation that a UN agency on cities
be established to address the many issues that had emerged from two decades
of post-war urban growth. Four years later, the first UN Conference on Human
Settlements in Vancouver set a waypoint on the timeline of policy and institutional
action to deal with urban problems.
Vancouver also contained the seeds of what we might call self-help, city-centric
actions. In the developing world, cities were slowly being brought into shelter
and infrastructure programs. In the developed countries, urban renewal and
regional strategies began to appear, supported by new tools of intergovernmental
finance such as community development block grants and community development
corporations in the US.
The slow emergence of learning cities 25
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
26 The changing place of cities in the urban age
Box 2.1 C2C Timeline
1891 – Fabian Municipal Program
1904 – First International Garden City Congress
1904 – Formation of the British Committee for the Study of Municipal
Institutions
1913 – First congress of the IGCTPA
1913 – First congress of the IULA/IUV (Union Internationale des Villes) in
Ghent
WWI
1919 – League of Nations founded
1920 – First town twinning7: Keighley, West Yorkshire, UK and Poix du
Nord, France
1932 – Height of IULA membership
WWII
1947 – UIM created
1951 – CEM (Council of European Municipalities) created
1951 – Monde Bilingue created
1956 – Sister Cities program created
1957 – United Towns Organization (UTO) founded under auspices of
Monde Bilingue
1967 – Sister Cities International founded
1971 – UN General Assembly resolution on “city twinnings as a means of
international cooperation”8
1972 – UN Conference on the Human Environment in Stockholm
1976 – First Habitat Conference in Vancouver
1980s – Regional city networks founded (EUROCITIES, FLACMA)
1989 – Formation of the Municipal Development Program in Africa (World
Bank and Government of Italy, Porreta Terme, Italy)
1990 – CEMR (formerly CEM) folded into IULA; Lomé Convention and
“decentralized cooperation”
1992 – Rio Earth Summit and UN-Habitat’s “Localizing Agenda 21” program
launched
1994 – CITYNET founded
1996 – UN Istanbul meeting: WACLAC (World Association of Cities and
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
Demographic and political mega-shifts
If environmental change was not a wake-up call for national policy makers, the
leviathan trinity of decentralization/democratization, metropolitanization and
globalization have together produced a thorough transformation in political and
institutional relationships over the last two decades. Many scores of countries
around the globe launched wholesale changes in governmental arrangements,
abrogating significant powers and handing them over to local governments
within the space of a single decade.
These swift changes in institutional responsibilities brought powerful incentives
for cities to acquire new knowledge. Cities were suddenly propelled into a
more open environment. They became aware of pressing needs for knowledge
to be able to hold position or shoot ahead to become more competitive.
More cities, more metropolises
The completion of the urban transition on the planet brings with it a corollary—
the creation of more and larger cities. Though noticed less or not at all by many
policy makers, the number of large cities is of equal if not greater significance
than the mere fact that the planet is now urban.
Since 1995, the number of cities with a half-million to a million in population—
so-called “intermediate-size cities”—in developing countries will have increased
by 75 percent to 388. By 2025 they will easily double the 1995 number (Table
2.2) to 531. The same is true for their larger counterparts, those cities in the one
The slow emergence of learning cities 27
Local Authorities Coordination) formed (IULA and UTO are both
members)
1999 – Cities Alliance (a “learning alliance”)
2000 – First Africities Conference
2001 – UN Istanbul +5 meeting
2002 – Summit on Sustainable Development in Johannesburg
2004 – IULA merges with FMCU-UTO and Metropolis to form United Cties
and Local Governments (UCLG)
2005 – Centre for C2C Cooperation founded in Seville by UN-Habitat; C40
founded
2010 – Global Urban Forum, Rio de Janeiro
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
million to five million range. The upshot is that nearly 300 cities have moved
into the intermediate and large-city range in the last 15 years, and another 250
will have been added by 2025. By that year, the global total will be closing in on
1200 cities.
The growth in the number of cities and the physical form they appear to be
taking have many ramifications. For one thing, growing political pressure will be
exerted on nation-states to cope with urban problems. The rising population in
middle-ranking cities exerts political pressure across a wider spectrum of cities
and voting constituencies. This pattern was noted as one of the many factors
that triggered a rise of support for decentralization in Latin America in the late
1980s and 1990s (Campbell, 2003). Many hundreds of new executives and city
stakeholders—in the private sector, neighborhoods, communities of interest—
will be entering the political spheres of battle to win greater national resources
and attention.
The form of urban growth makes matters more difficult. Angel’s calculations
show a decline in densities in virtually all of the 120 cities sampled in this intermediate
size range, highlighting an apparent trend toward increased physical
separation of settlements and rising service costs (Angel et al., 2011). Also, virtually
all of the intermediate and large cities are surrounded by many distinct municipal
administrations, creating clusters of cities whose governance and management
systems were designed for the most part to service a core cluster, not a spreading
network of municipalities. Governance arrangements represent a topic of interest
everywhere.
And yet the intermediate size cities may be setting trends for economic growth
28 The changing place of cities in the urban age
Table 2.2 Number of cities of various population sizes: 1995–2025
Size World total Less developed Developed
range
(millions)
1995 2010 2025 1995 2010 2025 1995 2010 2025
>10 13 21 29 9 15 22 4 6 7
5 to 10 19 33 46 14 26 36 5 7 10
1 to 5 263 385 502 170 282 393 93 103 109
0.5 to 1 337 512 664 222 388 531 115 124 133
0.1 to 0.5 2507 2717 2741 1614 1783 1769 893 934 972
Total 3139 3668 3982 2029 2494 2751 1110 1174 1231
Source: United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division
(2010). World Urbanization Prospects: The 2009 Revision, New York: United Nations
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
and consumer demand. McKinsey & Company sees the “middle weight” cities
with populations of around 400,000 to 600,000 as driving a significant fraction
of global GDP growth in the next 20 years (Dobbs et al., 2011). A growing middle
class in these cities will begin to exert economic and political pressure to meet
health and housing needs for the very young, coming from newly formed families,
and the very old. The growing number and qualitative changes in cities are not
the only reasons that cities need help. Other global shifts are also at play.
Decentralization and democratization
Most countries around the globe are engaged in some form of decentralization,
meaning that subnational units of government are sharing in powers to make
decisions, administer government or spend revenues. Nearly 25 republics in Latin
America accomplished this change during the 1990s. Dozens of other countries
in Asia and Africa as well as Eastern Europe are also going through the transformation
of political power, increasing the importance of cities in the conduct
of public business. Often accompanied by democratization, these shifts mean that
city leadership—mayors, elected officials, the private sector, civic leaders—are
playing a more important role for their nations. They are also required to answer
to a distinct constituency, one from below. This puts extra weight on local leaders
to organize the direction of growth, shape public choices, engage the public
and decision-making process, and implement decisions that are made.
Among the more frequently mentioned drivers of these changes are the
exhaustion of the central-state model after the collapse of the Soviet Union, and
the realization of the need for alternatives to central state-led growth, particularly
alternatives that draw on a broader-based pyramid of legitimacy and state
presence. Meanwhile in Europe, the process of regionalization encouraged by
the European Union as well as scores of countries outside Europe is confronting
the emergence of regionalist demands (Spain, Italy, Scotland, Northern Ireland).
At virtually the same time, and for similar reasons, the spread of democracy was
a palpable form of reconnecting citizens and governments, and many actors and
grass-roots movements pushed for deeper democratization in countries of Africa,
Asia and Latin America (United Cities and Local Governments, 2008).
Going global
In a related sphere, and about the same time, liberalization of trade and the
dramatically increased velocity of global transactions suddenly thrust states into
The slow emergence of learning cities 29
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
a more vulnerable, more competitive environment, as compared to earlier decades
(Amin and Tomaney, 1995). One consequence of the globalized economy has
been the rise of cross-state corporate connections. As national borders began to
lose their importance as markers of comparative advantage, regions and cities
became the next distinguishing feature on the economic landscape (Harris, 2003;
Beaverstock et al., 1999). Accordingly, a regional perspective on economic development
began to assume an important place in both the process and the outcome
of decentralization.
Cities are particularly ready to address these intertwined issues of growth
and the environment as they set about creating strategies to retain or advance
their position in the global marketplace. In the face of new global competition,
cities and regions are discovering that the old approaches and tools are obsolete.
Models of growth developed over the past 50 years—in import substitution, for
instance—are obsolete in a globalized economy. Cities in which industry and
manufacturing were once protected are now more vulnerable to competitive
pressures. With the protective shells of trade barriers stripped away and reduced
protection from national boundaries, cities, given new spending and decisionmaking
powers, are doubly exposed and looking for answers.
Independent sources of thought emerge
Universities, foundations and NGOs succeeded in establishing a new edge in
understanding the dynamics and emerging challenges in urban development.
Decentralization itself was one major topic of interest. The Friedrich Ebert
Foundation, the Ford Foundation, the Konrad Adenauer Foundation, and the
Friedrich Naumann Foundation all launched programs addressing issues related
to decentralization. These foundations and bilateral donors found it easy to
increase emphasis on democratic decision making as the influences of state reform
and decentralization began to spread across the world.
Countries also began to influence one another. Exchanges between and
among various national and subnational governments were important in framing
issues, formulating approaches, and designing legislation and institutions. For
example, the Commonwealth of Local Governments was active in spreading best
practices about management. Cities began to be involved in these exchanges.
Authorities and policy makers in (unitary) states, such as Peru and Bolivia to cite
two examples, were intrigued with the promulgation of Colombia’s first laws on
competencies and resources in 1986. Various decentralization laws in Colombia
accorded powers to cities and regions that approximated those normally given
to states in federated republics, much as Spain had done to strengthen the
30 The changing place of cities in the urban age
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
autonomy of its regions. Nearly all nations learned from—and, certainly, policy
makers and legislators commented about—the Brazilian Constitution of 1988 and
the Bolivian national participation law promulgated in 1994.
The need for technical and managerial solutions has expanded in the past few
decades, just as the breadth of new knowledge available to cities is expanding.
Environmental and governance issues resulted in an elevation of standards,
requiring cities to meet more rigorous requirements in operations and services.
For instance, concerns about water expanded from the issue of supply and coverage,
to that of quality, to increases in the number of pollutants being measured,
and to complications regarding treatment and recycling. In governance, the
standard practice of formulating a political program evolved into alternative
competitive arrangements and in some cases publication of city budgets and
procurement arrangements. Cities came under pressure to meet new accounting
standards and to show how city business was being conducted free from the
ever-present intrusions of corruption. Information technology makes real-time
presence of data a reality for cities, and the pressure of democratic forces easier
to transmit and be heard. The IT revolution from a city-management point of
view also allows quicker access to, and more demand for, information about city
operations and services.
The rise of horizontal cooperation
Except for mega-cities, most urban places have long been given short shrift by
national governments. For the first several decades after World War I, national
governments saw themselves as the guiding, designing and controlling elements
in the public sector. The predominance of the nation-state both fed and was
reinforced by the international distress of wartime conflicts and economic
depression. In less than a decade after World War II, the first new pressures on
cities exerted by demographic and environmental concerns began to reveal the
fault-lines in the hegemony of nation-states as sole proprietors of wisdom and
policy for cities.
With decentralization and democratization, together with globalization, many
large cities are becoming more entrepreneurial in their quest for knowledge,
more demanding for latest techniques, and in greater need of experienced hands
to solve problems. Many obvious and a few not so obvious forces contributed to
this transformation. One part of the story is that central governments have failed
for decades to provide a policy framework in which cities can flourish. Cities
were blamed for their countries’ problems and largely left to their own devices.
Decade after decade of failed or half-hearted policies did little to solve these
The slow emergence of learning cities 31
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
problems and even less to foster and support a capacity in cities to address growing
urban challenges.
Today, and in the future, the city may be the only political unit on the planet
that is expanding in number and increasing in power, especially in comparison
to the nation-state, which is clearly losing ground, at least relative to the past.
Decentralization of governance in most countries around the world, though slow,
is contributing to this reverse of fortune. Globalization, the digital revolution,
democratization and decentralization are changing the pattern.
We need to look back once again to the era following World War II to see
how institutional capacity building was keeping pace with the demographic and
political change just discussed. The post-war institutional stock of actors was
influenced heavily by the arrival of the Council of European Municipalities (CEM),9
the Union Internationale des Maires (UIM) and Monde Bilingue10 in the late 1940s
and early 1950s. The CEM was a move by the federalists of Europe to facilitate
political union—a continent of citizens guided by local self-governance; Monde
Bilingue was more preoccupied by the notion of universal brotherhood and
understanding. The Americans entered the fray with the Sister Cities11 movement
in 1956, a twinning program based partly in a sly Cold War agenda mixed with
a more benign interest in citizen diplomacy, one of Eisenhower’s antidotes to
the military-industrial complex.
Competition brewed between town-twinning organizations, and the number
of pairings grew rapidly in the 1950s and 1960s. Many city partnerships led to real
informational and interpersonal exchange: the twinned cities of Birmingham
and Frankfurt exchanged workers to encourage skills development and knowledge
transfer; Dortmund, Leeds and Lille did similarly. Extra-European twinnings
emerged slowly, starting in the 1960s and 1970s. Soviet cities were paired with
others in the region while French municipalities matched up with cities in their
(often former) colonial territories. Meanwhile, intra-European twinnings accelerated;
between 1963 and 1975, there were 50 a year between Germany and France
alone (Weyreter, 2003).
With the help of lobbying efforts by organizations like the United Towns
Organization (UTO), in 1971 the UN General Assembly passed a resolution on “city
twinnings as a means of international cooperation.” The resolution endorsed the
idea of inter-municipal cooperation between the developed and developing
world. Efforts to link cities from the North and South gained momentum in the
ensuing decades and developed the concept of twinning from one based on
global understanding and cultural exchange to a relationship aimed more at promoting
sustainable development and good governance.
Further development of the city-to-city relationship came from the idea of
“decentralized cooperation.” Popularized at the EU’s Lomé Convention in 1990,
32 The changing place of cities in the urban age
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
decentralized cooperation can take the form of town twinning and use the
relationship to foster better development strategies, often by involving development
agencies in the practice. About 20 percent of all city-to-city partnerships in
South Africa involve decentralized cooperation, funded by the development
agencies of Sweden, the Netherlands, Belgium, Australia, Canada, the UK,
Germany and Norway (de Villiers, 2007).
These trends reflected three changes. First, international development
paradigms had shifted their focus increasingly toward urban development and
multidisciplinary approaches, turning specifically to capacity building, institutional
strengthening and good governance—all of which are supported by city-to-city
relationships. Second, urban management issues had become more urgent and
complex. Third, increased citizen participation had enhanced the possibilities of
including a range of stakeholders in urban decision making (Bontenbal, 2009).
Since the 1990s the rise in city-to-city exchange has been further aided by a
shift in development thinking away from a focus on managing cities to one on
governing cities (Bontenbal, 2009). This places greater importance on the quality
of local government. City-to-city exchange has also been catalyzed by a global
recognition of local governments as development players. This chord was struck
at the 1992 Rio Conference, after which many countries set out to decentralize
development responsibilities to the municipal level.
Other factors associated with international development consensus enhanced
the profile of horizontal relationships, namely: the 1996 UN-Habitat City Summit
in Istanbul; the 2001 Istanbul +5 events focused on horizontal cooperation; the
2002 Summit on Sustainable Development in Johannesburg; and the 2005
founding of the Centre for C2C Cooperation in Seville. These efforts by the UN,
its development subgroups, and its allies in the form of NGOs, constitute an
international institutionalization and endorsement of municipalities’ active
participation in local urban development.
Twenty years after the Vancouver Conference, the major city associations
and organizations—United Towns, Arab Cities and Towns, International Union
of Local Authorities—began a process of merger. As a result of decentralization,
a phenomenon, it must be noted, that coincided with the fall of the Berlin wall
and the failure of the central-state model, scores of national associations of local
governments were formed.
The 1996 meeting of the United Nations Centre for Human Settlements (UNHabitat)
in Istanbul will stand as another important waypoint in the development
of the institutional capacity of cities and their affiliated organizations. Istanbul
gave birth to United Cities and Local Governments (UCLG), a new amalgam of
organizations and associations of both political and technical membership. The
UCLG is symbolic of the transition by individual cities and individual organizations
The slow emergence of learning cities 33
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
to a single voice, authorized to speak and be heard in the UN system, including
the World Bank, to coordinate the concerns, political voice, and technical
exchange between and among cities around the world. From the standpoint of
city learning, the creation of the UCLG represents a milestone. It focused the voice
of cities and city associations. More importantly, it represents a step toward
efficiency because it consolidates city concerns into a single channel.
Emerging items on the agenda of urban learning—
10 urban issues and the need to know for global
learning
Although no formal agenda of action has been published by cities or affiliated
organizations, an emerging set of key issues is facing cities in the coming decades.
The following section might be seen as a list of wicked problems and a curriculum
for city learning.
For political and practical reasons, first on the list is that most large cities are
spreading out—decreasing in density—and solutions to metropolitan governance
arise in every region of the world. Recall that Angel and his colleagues recently
reported that average densities are falling in cities around the globe, and particularly
in the developing regions (Angel et al., 2011). Angel’s data are drawn
from side-by-side comparisons of 1990 and 2000 satellite images of a representative
sample of 120 cities. His team calculated that average density decrease is
a direct function of spreading city perimeters.
Second, as settlements move beyond established administrative and jurisdictional
boundaries, they stretch the customary definitions of city limits, spreading
to adjacent metropolitan areas, contributing to fragmentation and deepening
the question of governance in urbanized regions. A well-known example of this
spreading urban region is the Boston–Washington corridor, a megalopolitan
region with a population of 50 million and extending more than 600 km; far
beyond the prospective planning competence of any of the more than five major
metropolitan areas in the region.
The significance of spreading urban regions leads to a third issue: the
increasing social distance implied in spreading metropolises. Though many lowincome
populations still settle in and around the urban core of large cities,
increasingly, low-income settlements take up residence on low-cost land where
property values are suppressed because of distance or due to clouded title, poor
conditions of slope or vulnerability to flood. Metropolitan cities increase the
importance of inter-jurisdictional coordination in planning, infrastructure investment,
and services delivery to differing social classes residing in contiguous areas.
34 The changing place of cities in the urban age
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
A fourth issue is that metropolitan centers have entered a more competitive
environment. Liberalization of trade leaves cities much more exposed to
outside competition because protectionist trade regimes no longer shield city
industries from competitors. Further, competitive pressures are now global. The
increasing velocity of international transactions—in trade, exchange of capital,
and investment—means that metropolitan cities must move quickly to retain
industries as well as to attract new ones.
Fifth is an issue of handling spillovers, both positive and negative. These are
defining features of metropolitan areas. Smaller cities or units of government
cannot generate the economies of scale that are typical of production in metropolitan
cities. On the other side of the coin, major cities generate negative
spillovers in pollution and congestion. The challenge of managing externalities
is made sharper by the absence of coordinated national policies in developing
countries to redress environmental imbalances.
Sixth is the issue of governance. Few organizational models seem to hold up
under the pressures of changing economic and political circumstances. Virtually
all the European countries are engaged in the question of metropolitan organization.
Turkey has addressed the problem directly with reforms that link
municipal, metropolitan and national tiers in planning and functions and the direct
election of a metropolitan mayor. Many national governments have given capital
cities special legal or financial status. Examples, including special districts, are
Brasilia, Canberra and Abuja (Nigeria). These enjoy special spending or planning
status, often linked directly to central government budgets. Cities in Europe,
Canada, the US and Korea have experimented with a variety of governance
configurations, with mixed success.
Many of the cities—London, Montreal and Toronto, for example—have
reversed field, going from regional councils or area-wide governments to facilitate
planning and investment in large-scale infrastructure back to small governance
units, and back again to larger areas in a quest to capture a wider tax base. In
the US, the policy battle has been over whether there is an economic pay-off for
cities with regional authorities.
The seventh issue arises from the spreading social problems of poverty,
insecurity and rising civic violence. The troubling trend toward the urbanization
of poverty started with the great waves of migration after 1950 in Latin America
and has returned into view in the past decade. Poverty has been growing faster
than population, particularly during the economic stagnation of the 1980s. On
the global level, a billion people live on less than a dollar a day. Additionally, the
nature of poverty has begun to change. Increasingly, poor households are headed
by women, and new problems related to drugs and violence make solutions even
more complicated.
The slow emergence of learning cities 35
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
Eighth, with globalization of the economy cities face sharper, if not completely
new, challenges to protect or grow their own economic interests. To put it simply,
cities in the developing world cope either with overwhelming new immigration,
often meaning rapidly growing slums, or declining economic fortunes, which
translates into dereliction of large parts of the urban landscape. In both cases,
the result is widespread unemployment, deteriorating housing and environmental
conditions, and poverty. But a trend that holds across all regions is that many of
the mid- to large-size cities are taking steps to tackle unemployment and job
creation, and many more are interested in learning how they can address livelihood
issues.
Corruption is the ninth issue, like others visible, but not prominent, in policy
agendas of only two decades ago. Corruption threatens to undermine the very
integrity of the governance systems, because “it generates economic costs by
distorting incentives, political costs by undermining institutions, and social costs
by redistributing wealth to the undeserving” (Klitgaard et al., 2000: 4). Information
and communication technology could add up to be a game-changer in
many ways. Though many applications are being deployed—in procurement,
system monitoring and reporting, direct service provision to citizens and businesses
such as licensing and permits, land use planning, and many more. But a
daunting field of obstacles still blocks the exploitation of IT’s great promise to
increase transparency and curb corruption (Schuppan, 2009).
Finally, large-scale disruption from natural and human-induced change has
also grown in prominence and acuity over the past few decades. Climate change
and other large-scale threats to national development—including pandemic
health threats like HIV/AIDS, SARS and bird flu—emanate from or have direct
impacts upon urban settlements. Cities in Africa have shouldered the burden of
the decimating impact of AIDS in lost lives, lost labor pool, and lost resources in
local health.
Certainly the most global of the newly emerging issues is climate change. While
all cities concentrate activities that result in greenhouse gases, the larger and more
immediate problem is one of adaptation (Working Group II Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change et al., 2008). This is because climate change increases
the risk to public health and loss of life and property in places where basic
infrastructure is already inadequate (Satterthwaite, 2009). It is no coincidence that
many geographic areas of focus of climate adaptation are also areas of poverty
and risky settlements.
Of less importance in the short to medium term, but ultimately crucial, is the
mitigation of greenhouse gases. Recent discoveries have concluded that previous
measurements greatly underestimate the contribution of biomass combustion (in
non-urban areas) to the atmospheric brown clouds over South Asia (Szidat, 2009).
36 The changing place of cities in the urban age
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
At the same time, there is clear evidence that cities are principal sources of
greenhouse gases, and most probably the most important human-made source.
However, cities in the developing world are not the most important emitters.
Governance and management in cities everywhere, and a gradual move to more
organized densities, is one of the frontlines in the battle to achieve sustainability.
The road ahead
The chapter has reviewed a straight historical timeline and examined some of
the principal forces—some old, others recently emerged—that draw cities into
knowledge exchange. Demographic growth was a transition that resulted not
just in an urban planet, but also in a planet populated with at least a thousand
cities, each potentially an important actor on the global arena. Migrations, in
turn, have brought pressure on land and shelter, and these have spilled over
into issues of environment, pollution, public health, and natural resource depletion.
Meanwhile, new standards in development, new technologies in transport
and communications, new approaches to the private sector, and a shift in
central–local relationships have brought cities into a new realm of action as they
awaken to a new imperative for knowledge exchange.
Today and in the future, cities are adapting to the tidal wave of challenges.
They are forming mechanisms to facilitate a learning process. The next chapter
will take measure of what we know about how cities learn.
Notes
1 The urban share of population in 1900 varied widely, from 80 percent in England to 40
percent in France, 25 percent in Italy, and 40 percent in Europe overall (Ewen and
Hebbert, 2007).
2 The London-based Fabians made their international splash at the Second International
Conference in London (1896). They advocated the necessity of having crucial services
like gas, housing, and welfare delivered by the government, a message propagated by
French and Belgian socialists in the early 20th century.
3 The study tours of the BCSMI focused on a wide variety of topics, including: the efficiency
of Swiss municipalities’ electric installations and the profitability of their utilities, Olso’s
specialized hospitals and its school system which offered free meals for students,
Denmark’s municipal health care model, Stockholm’s telephone network, and urban
management practices in Germany (Hietala, 1987).
4 The IULA’s mission was to promote and unite democratic local governments worldwide
and serve to promote professional standards, advocate for local governments, and be
The slow emergence of learning cities 37
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
a worldwide source of information, intelligence, and exchange to build local government
capacity.
5 IULA attendance rates increased from 162 cities representing 28 countries in 1913 to 366
cities representing 39 countries in 1925. Municipal federations began to form and swell
attendance. By 1932 membership in the IULA was estimated at 50,000 urban and local
authorities (Dogliani, 2002: 585).
6 See the excellent Urban Development Timeline developed by Duane Kissick and PADCO,
currently found at the AECOM website: http://www.urbantimeline.org/.
7 According to Local Government International Bureau, UK.
8 Hafteck, 2003.
9 CEM later lengthened its name by adding Regions to its purview: it became CEMR in
1984.
10 Monde Bilingue was reinvented in 1957 as the United Towns Organization (UTO), also
known as the Fédération Mondiale des Cités Unies (FMCU). Monde Bilingue, for all
intents and purposes, became FMCU-UTO.
11 The Sister Cities program, too, underwent an organizational evolution; it was institutionalized
in 1967 as the non-profit Sister Cities International.
References
Amin, A. and J. J. Tomaney (1995). “The regional dilemma in a neo-liberal Europe,” European
Urban and Regional Studies, pp. 171–188.
Angel, S., D. Civico and A. Blei (2011). Making room for a planet of cities. Lincoln Institute
of Land Policy, Cambridge, MA.
Beaverstock, J., R. Smith and P. Taylor (1999). “A roster of world cities,” Cities, 16 (6), pp.
445–458.
Bontenbal, M. (2009). Cities as partners. The challenge to strengthen urban governance
through North–South city partnerships, Eburon, Delft.
Campbell, T. (2003). The quiet revolution: decentralization and the rise of political participation
in Latin American cities, University of Pittsburgh Press, Pittsburgh, PA.
Carson, R. (1962). Silent spring, Houghton Mifflin, Boston.
de Villiers, J. C. (2007). “Towards an understanding of the success factors in international
twinning and sister-city relationships,” South African Journal of Business Management,
38, 1–10.
Dobbs, R., S. Smit, J. Remes, J. Manyika, C. Roxburgh, and A. Restrepo (2011). Urban world:
mapping the economic power of cities, McKinsey & Company, 49pp.
Dogliani, P. (2002). “European municipalism in the first half of the twentieth century: the
socialist network,” Contemporary European History, 11, pp. 573–596.
Ewen, S. and M. Hebbert (2007). “European cities in a networked world during the long
20th century,” Environment and Planning C: Government & Policy, 25, pp. 327–340.
Gaspari, O. (2002). “Cities against states? Hopes, dreams and shortcomings of the European
municipal movement, 1900–1960,” Contemporary European History, 11, pp. 597–621.
38 The changing place of cities in the urban age
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
Hafteck, P. (2003). “An introduction to decentralized cooperation–definitions, origins and
conceptual mapping,” Public Administration and Development, 23, pp. 333–345.
Hardy, D. (1991). From garden cities to new towns: campaigning for town and country
planning, 1899–1946, Routledge, London.
Hietala, M. (1987). Services and urbanization at the turn of the century: the diffusion of
innovations, Finnish Historical Society, Helsinki.
Klitgaard, R., R. MacLean-Abaroa and H. Parris (2000). Corrupt cities: a practical guide to
cure and prevention, ICS Press and World Bank Institute, Oakland, CA and Washington,
DC.
Kozinska-Witt, H. (2002). “The union of Polish cities in the Second Polish Republic,
1918–1939: discourses of local government in a divided land,” Contemporary European
History, 11, pp. 549–571.
Meadows, D., J. Randers, D. L. Meadows, and W. W. Behrens (1972). The limits to growth:
a report from the Club of Rome’s project on the predicament of mankind, Universe
Books, New York.
Satterthwaite, D. (2009). “Addressing local and global environmental agendas in urban
areas,” Urban Strategy Review Background Paper, World Bank, Washington, DC.
Schuppan, T. (2009). “E-government in developing countries: experiences from sub-Saharan
Africa,” Government Information Quarterly, special issue: “From implementation to
adoption: challenges to successful e-government diffussion,” 26, pp. 118–127.
Szidat, S. (2009). “Sources of Asian haze,” Science, 323, pp. 470–471.
Union of International Associations (2011). “Growth of international associations: nongovernmental
organizations (NGO) and intergovernmental organizations (IGO),
1909–1999” (paper), Union of International Associations, Brussels.
United Cities and Local Governments (ed.) (2008). Decentralization and local democracy in
the world, First Global Report, United Cities and Local Governments and the World Bank,
Barcelona, Spain and Washington, DC.
United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division (2010).
World urbanization prospects. The 2009 revision. United Nations, New York.
Weyreter, M. (2003). “Germany and the town twinning movement,” Contemporary Review,
282, pp. 37–43.
Working Group II Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, M. Parry, O. Canziani and
J. Palutikof (2008). Climate change 2007: Working Group II contribution to the Fourth
Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, UK.
The slow emergence of learning cities 39
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
3 Cities as collective learners: what do
we know?
The previous chapters have demonstrated a growing appetite for knowledge and
technical exchange among cities around the globe. That discussion covered a
few of the ways that cities go about gathering knowledge. We turn now to theoretical
and practitioner literature to review what is known about organizational
learning and to frame our understanding about cities as learners.
The central proposition in this book is that cities, though loose in terms of
organization, mandate, bottom line and coherence, nevertheless learn. The last
chapter showed us that very many cities, singly and in groups, are organizing
ways to reach out to gather information about policy and practice from each
other. They appear to acquire new knowledge just like any other organized entity.
But given the diverse assemblage of powers, cross-cutting interests, and constantly
evolving kaleidoscope of actors contained in them, how are cities able to retain
and make use of knowledge? It is undeniable that cities innovate, reform, and
make deliberate collective judgments with positive advances in economy, society
and welfare. What do we know about collective learning and how might the
present state of knowledge help us understand how cities go about the process—
gathering, validating, storing and retrieving knowledge—and how is learning
connected to innovation?
Notable recent works do not address the full range of these basic questions.
Colin MacFarlane’s Learning the City (2011), Safford’s Why the Garden Club
Couldn’t Save Youngstown (2009), and Landry’s Creative City (2000) are pertinent
examples of works that address exchange of ideas and innovation or reform in
cities. These contributions see cities in the light of collective action, and all of
them in one way or another speak of transactions in ideas between cities, none
drills down in to the detailed mechanics of learning.
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
Smart thinkers have written a covey of business books that trade on catchy
phrases but shallow science, such as Peter Senge’s Fifth Discipline (1990), Richard
Ogle’s Smart World (2007) and Malcolm Gladwell’s Tipping Point (2002). But none
of these penetrate beneath the silicon-thin surface of the digital age or pop
network culture to see that human relationships still count in making sense of
connectedness. Reliability and veracity of information are more important than
global connections, high volume and blazing speed. We need to think beyond
smart cities to understand the importance of meaning in information flow, be it
over the internet or through personal networks of exchange.
Straying away from cities as protagonists in knowledge generation and
transformation might be attributed in part to the digital revolution. The siren
call of information flow that came with the digital revolution has been irresistible.
The modern notions of the digitally connected are mostly a latter-day
view of Meier’s (1962) communications theory, with one major exception. Despite
brilliant, groundbreaking work from thinkers like Jan van Dijk and Manuel
Castells, some of the important elements of truth about urban development have
not received much attention (Castells, 2009; van Dijk, 2005). Leading academic
thinkers, cheered on by digital corporations, swerved toward the connectedness
of networks and interaction with omnipresent media without giving full attention
to deeper notions that make connectivity meaningful, particularly the ideas of
human interaction that were at the heart of Meier’s communications theory.
The magic of cities is that unlike corporations, where profit motives compel
knowledge acquisition and management in predictable and replicable ways, cities
seem to manage the same processes by civic assembly. By this I mean that cities
have to find other ways to penetrate silos of information and achieve “buy-in”
and alignment. And precisely because we have evidence of systematic change,
we should explore the calculus of learning and pinpoint the locus of knowledge,
and begin to shape policies to favor learning and innovation.
But we should also understand what is not covered in this present treatment
of learning. The central idea in this book is collective learning, not individual
values or specific skills. These are often the focus on twinning and international
municipal cooperation and exchange. And though they are important, the key
idea here—an idea that sets this work apart from much on municipal international
cooperation (MIC) and twinning—is that cities or parts of them learn as a unit.
They begin to reach agreement faster, they show a widespread common understanding
of themselves. They achieve a collective city identity. All of this is based
on common shared values, and this in turn on exposure to and working through
the differences among key stakeholders in the city.
Cities as collective learners 41
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
Cities as concentrators and transformers
It is almost inevitable that cities are often sources of innovation because they
are the places where information is concentrated and exchanged. Urban thought
pioneers like Richard Meier foresaw this as early as the early 1960s with his
groundbreaking Communications Theory of Urban Growth (Meier, 1962). Meier
saw cities much like nuclear reactors: they bring resources of all kinds into concentrations
that are not found anywhere else. Individual agents—workers, CEOs,
institutions, neighborhood activists and people in all walks of life—act to combine
and recombine ideas. All this leads to the transformation of resources into something
new. New emerging qualities appear. Of course, many negative outcomes
arise as well: crime, corruption, pollution and a myriad of other ills. But the potential
for innovation lies in this concentration of information, mixing of ideas, and
transformation into something new.
Some of the key works in collective learning—Don Schön’s Beyond the Stable
State (1973), Chris Argyris and Schön’s Organizational Learning (1978) and
Nonaka’s 1994 insights into innovation—developed important waypoints in the
evolution of thinking about collective learning. Don Schön’s work evolved in
collaboration with Chris Argyris to address personal and organizational actions,
particularly in connection with unintended outcomes of actions. Argyris and Schön
made a critical distinction between common theories of action and more critical
evaluation of underlying relationships. When experience confirms our assumptions
about how the world works, we have single-loop learning; i.e., direct
feedback. But when action A produces unintended consequences, then a deeper,
more critical review of underlying values may be needed, a process Argyris and
Schön refer to as “double-loop learning.”
This simplified model of learning leads to more open, participatory feedback
systems that help to stave off implicit biases and confront denial when outcomes
look bad. Elaborated forms of the model led Schön, Argyris and followers like
Peter Senge to develop strategies of cross-disciplinary, organizational learning
based on systems thinking. And though these thinkers and the body of work
they helped build led to many changes in the field of planning, they are nearly
a half-century old: why refer to them at all?
The key reason is that at the heart of the matter for Argyris, Schön and others
were issues of value sharing and trust among actors engaged in collective enterprises,
whether in public settings or private organizations. These and related ideas
are now reappearing in more recent literature in a half-dozen fields. Examples
are in organizational learning, learning economies, regional competitiveness,
capacity and institution building, together with, but to a lesser extent, the sociology
and geography of networks. Each of these areas of work has some relevance
42 The changing place of cities in the urban age
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
to the question of cities as learning organizations. Still, only a minor share of
any specific body of writing has been focused specifically on cities and almost
nothing has been collated into a single volume treating the broad scope of
learning and change. We turn now to a survey of some of this work to sharpen
the question and review what is already known.
Coincidence and gaps: collective learning in urban
development
Much of the academic and policy literature on regional competitiveness and
clusters of industries alludes to the importance of underlying, “soft” infrastructure,
described as an environment conducive to innovation that lies somewhat
or mostly external to firms and companies. Aydalot’s term innovative milieu,
referring to an atmosphere of trust that is helpful for both collaboration and
creativity in a locality (Aydalot, 1986), is a useful starting point in this stream of
thought. Trust and collaboration are concepts that have been explored extensively
in firms, regions and clusters by a large number of authors, of whom only a
representative sample is cited here (Camagni, 1995; Kitson et al., 2004; Kresl, 2007;
Polenske, 2004; Porter, 2001).
Some analysts posit that learning, trust and creativity go together and are
accepted parts of the soft infrastructure of city regions (Pinch et al., 2003). But
with few exceptions (Brandt et al., 2009; Faulconbridge, 2007), most of the
work just cited focuses on firms and clusters in city regions and not on cities or
city-regions themselves. Moulaert and colleagues point to the initiatives taken
by city-regions as “entrepreneurial urbanism” in the context of globalization
(Moulaert et al., 2005). It is only one short step further to see cooperative
behaviors in learning. These linkages are the focus of Brandt and colleagues, who
see inter-organizational relationships as a way to understand metropolitan
regional growth (Brandt et al., 2009). But what about the wider environment of
the places where collaborating or innovative firms are located? What part of the
innovative milieu arises from non-firm actors working together with private and
civil sectors in the public goods areas of successful city-regions?1
Another largely separate but voluminous body of literature blossomed around
organizational learning (and later learning organizations), with applications
branching into behavior of both firms and public bureaucracies. Several reviews
cover the main developments and watershed points in this vast domain (Dierkes
et al., 2001; Easterby-Smith and Lyles, 2002; Huber, 1991). Seminal in much of this,
in fact the most frequently cited in Easterby-Smith and Lyles’ comprehensive
review, is the work of Ikujiro Nonaka.
Cities as collective learners 43
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
Nonaka developed a key insight about industrial management. His concept
relates to the conversion of tacit to explicit knowledge, a transformation involving
a propitious environment for learning, something close to Aydalot’s “innovative
milieu,” or in Nonaka’s terminology a ba (Nonaka, 1994; Nonaka et al., 2000). The
“ba” refers to an atmosphere, an openness, in which managers and workers are
free from the negative constraints of possible embarrassment, retribution or even
fear. Figure 3.1 depicts Nonaka’s idea of the ba.
The ba is a working environment created and maintained in a process of moving
from open exchange (socialization in Figure 3.1), then moving clockwise
through the other elements in Figure 3.1. In the expressing of tacit dimensions
of knowledge, tacit knowledge is gradually externalized and adopted as accepted
and shared knowledge by the larger peer group. It is something akin to play;
individuals are given the freedom to think creatively. This insight harks back to
the ideas of Dewey and Piaget about learning. The play is not invoked in most
management studies, and the ba concept has been applied to city-regions in
only one case found in the literature; that of Tampere, Finland (Kostiainen, 2002).
We shall return to the idea of ba in the city in later chapters.
Other branches of organizational learning extend into capacity building and
the concept of social capital. This body of work explores many areas, such as style
and capacity of governance, the expression of voice, methods of conflict resolution,
and the build-up of trust (Chaskin et al., 2001; Ostrom et al., 1994; Putnam, 2000;
Uphoff, 2000). Others address conditions of creativity (Landry, 2000; Landry and
Matarasso, 1998), facilitation of collective decisions and reduction of opportunistic
behaviors (Grootaert and van Bastelaer, 2002), and the importance of information
exchange. Examples include the cases of Tampere, Finland (Kostiainen, 2002;
Kostiainen and Sotarauta, 2002); northern Denmark and southern Sweden
(Malmberg and Maskell, 2006); and Curitiba, Brazil (Vassolar, 2007).
This last group of cases focuses on inter-network connections among the many
regional organizations involved in research, urban planning and implementation.
44 The changing place of cities in the urban age
Internalization Combination
Socialization Externalization
Nonaka’s “Ba”
Figure 3.1 Nonaka’s ba
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
But none of the authors cited in the preceding paragraph has drilled down
systematically into either the sources of knowledge or the intra-city political or
sociological dynamics of knowledge processing by individuals and groups involved
in collective learning. In other words, they point to an assemblage of knowledgeintensive
activities—universities, research institutions, firms dealing in high tech,
and the like—but they do not specify the human relational elements that tie these
knowledge places together. The elements of a city’s own innovative milieu, its
ba, lies outside and beyond the firms that operate there. Indeed the ba may be
the very qualities that attract the firms in the first place.
The ties that bind
An equally large corpus of literature has been developed on social networks in
organizations. The rapidly expanding field of social network analysis, understood
as a branch of social capital, has covered many aspects of social and organizational
life, again with a strong emphasis on business and innovation. Examples
of thinkers from this area include Barabási, Newman and Watts (Barabási, 2002;
Newman et al., 2006; Watts, 2003), to name the most recognizable. The distinguishing
feature of these works is that they look at macroscopic properties of
networks whose connected nodes reach into the many millions—on the internet,
for instance, as well as in social and biological structures. Systems of cities fit this
pattern and exhibit some of the macro-properties such as the power law found
in natural systems. The authors develop axioms (e.g., preferential selection) to
explain mathematical regularities found in large network structures.
More to the point, the network literature deals with power relationships, social
movements, control of information flow and networks as learning tools for specific
groups. Some of these ideas are relevant to the present discussion, for instance,
intra-city partnerships and connections (Entwistle et al., 2007; Tresman et al., 2007),
social movements (Mische, 2003; Parker, 2008; Passy, 2003) and governance of
natural resources (Bodin and Crona, 2009). But while social network analysis (SNA)
does provide a way to measure connections and trust, it has been applied only
rarely to cities as units of analysis (Brandt et al., 2009; Cheng et al., 2004; Diani
and McAdam, 2003; Fawaz, 2008). A key step still to be taken is to use the
quantitative tools developed for social network analysis to probe the creation,
maintenance and change of social and political values (Emirbayer and Goodwin,
1994), such as those suggested by the concepts of cohesiveness and trust, ingredients
that are likely a part of “soft infrastructure” external to a firm.
In short, these separate but partially overlapping streams of work—on regional
competitiveness, organizational learning, and social capital and networks—all
Cities as collective learners 45
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
contribute to a better understanding of the conditions and mechanisms of
learning by multiple players in firms and organizations. Each body of thought
recognizes that actors in open systems take part in collective learning, even when
no explicit, formal arrangements govern the system. Further, trust and value
sharing are seen as common denominators in a ba, an innovative milieu, the soft
infrastructure or a creative city. These ideas provide an initial framework to
explore learning environments in cities.
But numerous methodological questions arise when applying learning to cities
as a unit of analysis. First, with rapidly changing leadership of cities, especially in
the developing world, how can collective knowledge be identified, managed,
and made available to future policy makers? And if “proactive” learning cities
invest deliberately in learning, as claimed in the examples of Seattle, Bilbao and
Curitiba (Campbell, 2009), have such cities achieved a civic ba, to employ Nonaka’s
term, or in other words, an innovative milieu in the civic realm? If so, how is this
to be measured? Further, what connection is there between the collective learning
being observed among leading cities and documented successes?
The conceptual model of networks in cities is straightforward and intuitive:
cities exchange ideas, and individuals in cities process and validate new knowledge.
There is no mathematical representation of city networks, either among
cities or in terms of informal exchange within them. The litmus test of veracity
and trust is met by individuals exchanging ideas and working together. Trust is
often the governing factor in determining whether a network link has any
meaning or significance for people learning in a city. In contrast to Barabási’s
insights on the making of individual connections and the production of regularities
in large structures, the stories in Beyond Smart Cities provide everyday working
examples at the level of individuals deciding whether or not to trust one another.
To the city
A growing body of literature speaks of cities as increasingly active players on an
international stage, often in the context of transmitting policy ideas (Dolowitz
and Marsh, 2000; Hewitt, 1999; Ward, 2007). Recall that only a few cases have
employed learning concepts to examine cities directly. Some look at the role of
crisis and leadership in subnational governments (Campbell and Fuhr, 2004) and
the conditions of creativity (Landry, 2000; Landry and Matarasso, 1998); others
highlight the importance of information, in Tampere, Finland (Kostiainen, 2002;
Kostiainen and Sotarauta, 2002), for instance, or Curitiba (Vassolar, 2007).
These last two examples focus on inter-network connections among the many
regional organizations involved in planning and implementation, but they have
46 The changing place of cities in the urban age
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
not drilled down into group or individual dynamics to illuminate the modes of
learning, the use of knowledge, or the mechanisms of storage. Neither have they
examined the impact or influence, if any, that the husbanding of knowledge has
on the creation of soft infrastructure.
Richard Florida provides still another, one could say, back-door perspective on
city learning by focusing on talent flows to cities (Florida, 2002). In other words,
Florida’s starting point for knowledge-based economies has more to do with
talent seeking environment than environment seeking talent. His findings provide
a fresh take on the entire development process. If talent drives knowledge
economies, what drives talent to cities? His answer is agreeable environments—
green, progressive and tolerant political and social values coupled with high
technology. These are key factors that attract college-educated youngsters and
those in the creative industries.
Florida introduces a new wrinkle in the common assumption, found most
notably in the European literature on knowledge economies, that knowledgebased
regions will have the talent they need. Florida’s ideas about creative classes
and their psychological and social preferences imply a reversal of the theory of
change. Talent breeds its own innovative milieu. Accordingly, policies to foster
knowledge economies may need to go much further than those typically found
in OECD policy manuals about knowledge regions.
On the other hand, recent evidence from the financial crisis shows that even
knowledge- and talent-intensive places like Portland are unable to keep all talent
employed, and some of the talent in Portland is willing to sit it out on the street,
as it were, rather than migrate to greener pastures for jobs. The quip line from
“Portlandia” (a recent TV comedy series) captures it well: “Portland, the place
where the young go to retire.” So if talent is a factor in knowledge economies
and learning, there must be more to the game. Cities like Portland still need to
do the learning and networking to innovate and keep people employed.
Cities like Portland might gain insight from the “learning cities” movement
in Europe and Australia. Learning Communities (via OECD and Pascal International)
is a nascent movement that has grown out of an interest in lifelong
education. Longworth’s Learning Communities is a group of practitioners and
academics, who apply concepts of lifelong learning and knowledge-based
economies to cities and communities as an approach to economic development
(Longworth, 2006). Strategic applications involve partnerships and networks.
But again, the unit of analysis is high-technology and knowledge-intensive
organizations and city-based knowledge industries but not, as in this volume,
individual players within the city interacting with one another.
Cities as collective learners 47
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
Summing up
Many domains of literature help us to understand the basic mechanisms of
collective learning. But we are still in the dark about the interplay among
individuals in social networks as they take part in collective learning and form
an innovative milieu. Further, how do we fit these ideas of collective action to
the zoology of city types we find operating in the real world? What framework
can account for all the rich variety of learners, the individuals, the gadflies, the
think tanks and private research and development centers, city twinning, and
learning regions? How do the core of ideas of trust, interpersonal sharing of
values, and the creation of an innovative milieu get installed in a city?
We shall see that the answers are found in the many ways that cities go about
learning. Many cities have little or no idea about their learning; some knowledge
agencies of cities are created mainly for non-learning purposes; and still others
are designed with deliberate intent to capture new knowledge continuously.
Above all, ready or not, cities are on the move. The chapters in Part II will
document a surprisingly high volume of city-to-city visits and a wide variety of
institutional arrangements.
Note
1 It can be said that Argyris and Schön focused on elements of the innovative milieu in
city-based organizations in the sense that the transmission of ideas and sharing of values
and deeper underlying structures of trust were part of double-loop learning (Argyris
and Schön, 1978; Schön, 1973).
References
Argyris, C. and D. Schön (1978). Organizational learning—a theory of action perspective,
Addison Wesley, Reading, MA.
Aydalot, P. (1986). Milieux innovateurs en Europe, GREMI, Paris.
Badshah, A. and J. Perlman (2002). “Mega-cities and the urban future: a model for
replicating best practices,” in G. Bridge and S. Watson, The Blackwell City Reader,
Blackwell Publishing, Oxford, UK, pp. 549–559.
Barabási, A.-L. (2002). Linked. The new science of networks, Perseus Press, Cambridge, MA.
Bodin, Ö. and B. Crona (2009). “The role of social networks in natural resource governance:
what relational patterns make a difference?,” Global Environmental Change, 19, pp.
366–374.
48 The changing place of cities in the urban age
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
Brandt, A., C. Hahn, S. Krätke and M. Kiese (2009). “Metropolitan regions in the knowledge
economy: network analysis as a strategic information tool,” Tijdschrift voor Economische
en Sociale Geografi, 100, pp. 236–249.
Camagni, R. (1995). “The concept of innovative milieu and its relevance for public policies in
European lagging tegions,” Journal of the Regional Science Association, 74, pp. 317–340.
Campbell, T. (2009). “Learning cities. Knowledge, capacity and competitiveness,” Habitat
International, 33, pp. 195–201.
Campbell, T. and H. Fuhr (2004). Leadership and innovation (Development Series), World
Bank Institute, Washington, DC.
Castells, M. (2009). The rise of the network society, Wiley-Blackwell, New York.
Chaskin , R., P. Brown, S. Venkatesh and A. Vidal (2001). Building community capacity, Aldine
de Gruyter, New York.
Cheng, P., C. Choi, S. Chen, T. Eldomiaty and C. Millar (2004). “Knowledge repositories in
knowledge cities: institutions, conventions and knowledge subnetworks,” Journal of
Knowledge Management, 8, pp. 96–106.
Diani, M. and D. McAdam (2003). Social movements and networks: relational approaches
to collective action, Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK.
Dierkes, M., A. B. Antal, J. Child and I. Nonaka (2001). Handbook of orgnizational learning
and knowledge, Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK.
Dolowitz, D. P. and D. Marsh (2000). “Learning from abroad: the role of policy transfer in
contemporary policy-making,” Governance, 13, pp. 5–23.
Easterby-Smith, M. and M. Lyles (2002). The Blackwell handbook of organizational learning
and knowledge management, Blackwell Publishing, London.
Emirbayer, M. and J. Goodwin (1994). “Network analysis, culture and the problem of
agency,” The American Journal of Sociology, 99, pp. 1411–1454.
Entwistle, T., G. Bristow, F. Hines, S. Donaldson and S. Martin (2007). “The dysfunctions of
markets, hierarchies and networks in the meta-governance of partnership,” Urban
Studies, 44, pp. 63–79.
Faulconbridge, J. (2007). “Exploring the role of professional associations in collective
learning in London and New York’s advertising and law professional service firm
clusters,” Environment and Planning, A39, pp. 964–985.
Fawaz, M. (2008). “An unusual clique of city-makers: social networks in the production of
a neighborhood in Beirut (1950–75),” International Journal of Urban and Regional
Research, 32, pp. 565–585.
Florida, R. (2002). The rise of the creative class, Basic Books, New York.
Gladwell, M. (2002). The tipping point. How little things can make a big difference, Little,
Brown and Company, Boston.
Grootaert, C. and T. van Bastelaer (2002). Understanding and measuring social capital. A
synthesis of findings and recommendations from the social capital initiative (Forum
series on the Role of Institutions in Promoting Economic Growth), United States Agency
for International Development, Washington, DC.
Hewitt, W. E. (1999). “Municipalities and the new internationalism. Cautionary notes from
Canada,” Cities, 16, pp. 435–444.
Cities as collective learners 49
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
Huber, G. P. (1991). “Organizational learning: the contributing processes and the literatures,”
Organization Science (special issue: “Organizational learning: papers in honor
of (and by) James G. March,” 2, pp. 88–115.
Kitson, M., R. Martin and P. Tyler (2004). “Regional competitiveness—an elusive yet key
concept,” Regional Studies, 38, pp. 991–999.
Kostiainen, J. (2002). “Learning and the ‘ba’ in the development network of an urban
region,” European Planning Studies, 10, pp. 613–631.
Kostiainen, J. and M. Sotarauta (2002). Tampere’s path from industrial to knowledge
economy. Finnish city reinvented. MIT Industrial Performance Center, Cambridge, MA.
Kresl, P. (2007). Planning cities for the future: the successes and failures of urban economic
strategies in Europe, Edward Elgar Publishing, Cheltenham and Camberley, UK.
Landry, C. (2000). The creative city, Earthscan, London.
Landry, C. and F. Matarasso (1998). The learning city-region: approaching problems of the
concept, its measurement and evaluation, OECD, Paris.
Longworth, N. (2006). Learning cities, learning regions, learning communities: lifelong
learning and local government, Routledge, Milton Park, UK.
MacFarlane, C. (2011). Learning the city: translocal assemblage and urban politics, Wiley-
Blackwell, London.
Malmberg, A. and P. Maskell (2006). “Localized learning revisited,” Growth and Change,
37, pp. 1–18.
Meier, R. L. (1962). A communications theory of urban growth, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Mische, A. (2003). “Cross-talk in movements: reconceiving the culture-network link,” in M.
Diani and D. McAdam (eds), Social movements and networks: relational approaches to
collective action, Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK.
Moulaert, F., A. Rodriguez and E. Swyngweddouw (2005). The globalized city. Economic
restructuring and social polarization in European cities, Oxford University Press, Oxford,
UK.
Newman, M., A. Barabási and D. Watts (2006). The structure and dynamics of networks,
Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.
Nonaka, I. (1994). “A dynamic theory of organizational knowledge creation,” Organization
Science, 5, pp. 14–37.
Nonaka, I., R. Toyama and N. Konno (2000). “SECI, ba and leadership: a unified model of
dynamic knowledge creation,” Long Range Planning, 33, pp. 5–34.
Ogle, R. (2007). Smart world. Breakthrough creativity and the new science of ideas, Harvard
Business School Press, Boston.
Ostrom, E., L. Schroeder and S. Wynne (1994). Institutional incentives and sustainable
development, Westview Press, Boulder, CO.
Parker, R. (2008). “Networked governance or just networks? Local governance of the
knowledge economy in Limerick (Ireland) and Karlskrona (Sweden),” Political Studies,
55, pp. 113–132.
Passy, F. (2003). “Social networks matter. But how?,” in M. Diani and D. McAdam (eds),
Social movements and networks: relational approaches to collective action, Oxford
University Press, Oxford, UK, pp. 21–48.
50 The changing place of cities in the urban age
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
Pinch, S., N. Henry, M. Jenkins and S. Tallman (2003). “From ‘industrial districts’ to
‘knowledge clusters’: a model of knowledge dissemination and competition in industrial
agglomerations,” Journal of Economic Geography, 3, pp. 373–398.
Polenske, K. (2004). “Competition, collaboration and cooperation: an uneasy triangle in
networks of firms and regions,” Regional Studies, 38, pp. 1029–1043.
Porter, M. (2001). “Regions and the new economics of competition,” in A. Scott (ed.), Global
city-regions. Trends, theory, policy, Oxford University Press, New York, pp. 139–157.
Putnam, R. D. (2000). Bowling alone. The collapse and revival of American community, Simon
and Schuster, New York.
Safford, S. (2009). Why the garden club couldn’t save Youngstown, Harvard University Press,
Cambridge, MA.
Schön, D. A. (1973). Beyond the stable state. Public and private learning in a changing society,
Penguin, Harmondsworth.
Senge, P. M. (1990). The fifth discipline. The art and practice of the learning organization,
Doubleday Currency, New York.
Tresman, M., E. Pasher and F. Molinari (2007). “Conversing cities: the way forward,” Journal
of Knowledge Management, 11, pp. 55–64.
Uphoff, N. (2000). “Understanding social capital: learning from the analysis and experience
of participation,” in P. Dagupta and I. Serageldin (eds), Social capital: a multifaceted
perspective, World Bank, Washington, DC, pp. 215–252.
van Dijk, J. (2005). The network society: social aspects of new media, Sage Publications,
London.
Vassolar, I. (2007). Urban Brazil. Visions, afflictions, and governance lessons, Cambria Press,
Youngstown, NY.
Ward, K. (2007). “Business improvement districts: policy origins, mobile policies and urban
liveability,” Geography Compass, 1, pp. 657–672.
Watts, D. (2003). Six degrees: the science of a connected age, W. W. Norton and Company,
New York.
Cities as collective learners 51
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
Part II
Framing a view
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
4 A gamut of learning types
Our run through the literature in the last chapter cut through many areas in
organizational learning, networks and innovation. We saw that not so much
has been written about deliberate city learning and innovation. We still know
little about how cities, especially the innovators, might be working toward the
construction of an innovative milieu. In this chapter, we shall see that some cities
deliberately shape innovative milieus while others ignore them.
In a previous article, I suggested that active, innovative cities develop their
own learning styles (Campbell, 2006). Cities like Bilbao and Curitiba have invested
heavily over decades as part of a development strategy that has paid dividends
in wholesale improvements. But we also know that cities take many approaches
to learning. The World Bank and UN-Habitat, as well as the membership profiles
of large, city-based organizations, tell us that a wide range of learning types can
be found among the 4000 medium and larger cities in the world. We shall explore
these ideas further in this and the following chapters.
A typology of city learners
UN-Habitat and others have developed frameworks (typologies) to form a map
of the different ways that cities engage in city-to-city learning. In particular,
the 2001 report by UN-Habitat is a useful guide (UN-Habitat and United Towns
Organization, 2001). That framework is adopted here with several important
modifications. First, the UN framework leaves out important categories of
cities that are specialized as well as those that are not heavily engaged in learning,
even though both specialists and slow movers are also acquiring and using
knowledge. Second, the UN was not concerned with failure to learn, and so the
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
framework does not include anything about why cities do not learn. We shall
touch on that point at the end of this chapter.
The ways cities learn can be illustrated using five categories, distinguished by
the degree to which the institutional effort in the city is organized and dedicated
to seeking out and capturing information (see Table 4.1).
Many cities could be put in more than one category much of the time. A city
department or mayor and accompanying constabulary will visit from time to time
to kick the tires of a place, send a dedicated mission, participate in a conference,
and join one or more networks. The point with these categories is not that they
are tidy and mutually exclusive. Rather, we wish to cover the main mechanisms
that cities use to get new ideas. The categories are distinguished partly by how
much collective effort a city must exert in any given category in order to obtain
new knowledge.
The rows of Table 4.1 depict a gradient of effort by the city, strong at the top
levels and weaker lower down. Toward the bottom, cities are passive recipients
rather than active learners. Linked to the level of effort is the order of learning.
At the top of the table, cities learn things—ideas, practices, policies—that can be
written down and transferred. A higher order of learning entails that exchange
of values and tacit knowledge which leads to validation and innovation.
56 Framing a view
Table 4.1 Typology of city learning
Type Principle Example
1. Individual cities, one Cities organize deliberate Seattle, Denver
on many learning missions
2. Individual cities, one Cities engage in episodic EUROCITIES, VNG, Sister
on one visits or exchanges Cities
3. City clusters on Cities that share common UNESCO World Heritage
clusters program objectives or Cities, Agenda 21 Cities
campaigns (ICLEI)
4. Cities in active Cities that are members UCLG and Metropolis,
networks in regional or global Healthy Cities, EUROCITIES,
associations AsiaCities, CITYNET
5. Cities in passive Cities that engage City Mayors, Local
networks casually in conferences, Government Information
events, and network Network (LOGIN)
bulletins
Source: Author
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
One of the key outcomes of putting effort into learning is that common
ground is formed, where participants from a city who take part in their city’s
learning engage inadvertently or deliberately in the interpersonal transfer of
values. This exchange and exposure lie at the heart of learning. We shall see
that these gains tail off as we move down the list, even if the specific factual
information or data accessed by a city might be valuable for it. By describing
these attributes of information exchange we can understand something about
how learning takes place. Later on, we can focus on how the city formalizes
information and stores learning, if indeed it does so at all. In each of the five
categories, case illustrations provide detail and context about the varieties of
learning.
Type 1: one on many
Seattle is a prototype city; it is proactive, reformer and learner. Seattle created a
process of learning that has ventured out to another city every year since 1992,
making its study missions, in the words of the National League of Cities, “arguably
the best city visit program in the U.S.” Study missions are to be distinguished from
trade and other missions, which depart regularly from the city every year. For
instance, the Port of Seattle, which comprises its container port, airport and ferry
facilities, also conducts and hosts visiting missions. The same can be said for each
of the departments of water, parks, planning, and education, and a dozen other
entities linked to the city. Although the study missions are the pre-eminent
program, any time a group from the city engages in learning exchange, both
“orders” of learning are achieved.
The study missions of Seattle are elaborate, highly organized, dedicated
visits scheduled 18 to 24 months in advance and conducted on a yearly basis by
the Trade Development Alliance, formerly a dependency of the Greater Seattle
Chamber of Commerce and now independent. The study missions engage up to
100 business and civic leaders from the greater Seattle area each year. Mission
membership turns over 60 to 80 percent each year, meaning that a rolling group
of veterans is always involved. The overarching objective is to broaden and
strengthen the understanding of city leaders about the position of Seattle vis-àvis
the visited city and its surrounding region.
According to Stafford (1999), six underlying goals of study missions are:
• to continue an ongoing process of relationship building among and between
Seattle’s civic leadership;
• to study and learn from the practices and programs of other cities and cultures
that may provide solutions to Seattle’s urban problems;
A gamut of learning types 57
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
• to promote the region’s business opportunities, including the ports, tourism,
goods and services, educational opportunities, and venues for international
meetings;
• to build relationships with the people and institutions in the cities visited;
• to organize special business and educational-opportunity meetings, such as
the biomedical meeting in London between the leadership of Seattle’s two
industry associations, the meetings between female leaders in Singapore and
Sydney, or the sharing of experiences with airport noise reduction;
• to help develop the most sophisticated civic leadership in the US on international
issues.
Seattle began its study tour program in 1992 with a visit by a small delegation
to the cities of Amsterdam, Rotterdam and Stuttgart. In 1993, Seattle was
one of the first visiting delegations to Vietnam after the normalization of that
country’s relations with the US. In 1994 a delegation visited the Kansai region of
Japan (Kobe and Osaka) and in 1995, Hong Kong. Succeeding missions visited
London and Bristol in 1997; Singapore in 1998; and Sydney in 1999; Shanghai
2002; Barcelona 2003 and Munich 2004. All of these visits were organized by the
Trade Development Alliance and included a similar profile of delegates.1
Participants on the missions include the top leadership figures of the city and
county and its utilities, ports, universities, private firms and NGOs. Not all of the
delegates are senior officials. The Boeing executive quoted in Chapter 1 pointed
out that he persuaded Boeing to send three of their top younger people on the
study tour because “it was the best value in training that money could buy.”
Each of the members, or their respective agencies, covers the travel and lodging
and other costs. Often the receiving cities provide receptions and meals, and
sometimes local transportation as well.
Most study tours involve detailed preparations with thick briefing books,
seminars given in advance, and usually two preparatory visits by the chief organizer
from Seattle. During the mission, the delegates meet over meals, discuss in
plenary what they have seen, and hear presentations by their hosts. Agendas
cover a wide variety of topics, including cultural, historical, economic and social
issues. Speakers include US citizens working in the city, officials from the city and
region, business leaders, and members of civil society. Each day involves a mixture
of speakers, site visits and cultural affairs. Business promotion and networking
do take place, but the participants on the study tours tend to spend most of
their day together, in a group or subgroups, divided according to interest. For
example, in Shanghai, a large delegation of health officials and university
researchers (from the University of Washington’s Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research
Center) held parallel meetings with counterparts on issues of public health while
elected officials and planners visited the city hall.
58 Framing a view
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
The heart of the learning experience takes place during these plenary sessions
and afterwards when delegates sit during meals, in meeting halls, or on the bus
in transit from one place to the next. They question and digest what they have
seen and heard and exchange perceptions and opinions with each other. These
transition moments allow them to absorb and gain perspective and insight on
their own issues back home.
For instance, Seattle has long considered the merits and demerits of better
public transit in the downtown area—light rail, in particular—and of the need
for a third runway at Sea-Tac airport. Another issue is governance, or at least
government coordination, in the greater Seattle area. Debates on these issues
have been protracted over years and have emerged as subtext during city
visits.
In this context, delegates visiting Shanghai were stunned to see a city nearly
the size of Seattle in volume of buildings constructed in the Pudong region in
less than 15 years. Surveying the ambitious progress made in Shanghai provoked
a debate among the touring team at the closing meeting. The Seattle contingent
spoke with growing unease about the swampy terrain of process-oriented planning
in their own city. The Chinese in Shanghai were on the other end of this
decision-making spectrum, where expedition and speed overrode all concerns for
environmental care, permits, hearings, due process in courts, and so on.
But though Seattle may be pre-eminent, many other proactive cities are on
an active and more or less regular search for knowledge. Major cities in the
US and Europe—Bilbao is a good example—undertake similar study tours,
organized with a specific program of events and themes to explore. Bilbao has
reached out to other cities for consultation in order to guide its strategy for
wholesale redevelopment along the Nervión River. Like Seattle, Bilbao’s search
for knowledge has run for several decades, but unlike Seattle, Bilbao’s program
has no fixed periodicity. Focused on strategic objectives of redevelopment in a
formerly derelict part of town, Bilbao both ventured out for visits and invited
peer cities to consult “in house” at conferences and seminars. Both visits and inhouse
events helped city leaders to set their sights as well as to gauge feasibility
of the options they began to develop. As we shall see in Chapter 8, as the plan
for massive infrastructure investments—in a new port, airport, rapid transit and
other features like the Guggenheim Museum—city leadership constantly renewed
its knowledge base as it implemented its redevelopment plan.
Other examples of proactive cities covered later include Amman, Charlotte,
Portland, Turin and Barcelona. All are engaged in more or less continuous
outreach efforts to solve specific problems or merely to keep up with developments
in best practice around a range of issues. Mixed in with these efforts
are study tours organized by chambers of commerce and NGOs. For instance,
A gamut of learning types 59
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
the Chamber of Commerce in Charlotte and Denver organized more or less
annual events, visiting another city usually, but not always, in the US. Though
no longer in the proactive category, Tijuana arranged a visit to Bilbao by the
Arthur Anderson consulting firm. That experience marked a shift in vision and
understanding for leaders in Tijuana, who were contemplating major investments
in the city. Many cities in Europe take advantage of the opportunities
created by common goals and linkages created in the context of the European
Union.
An important distinguishing feature of proactive learning cities is the high
relative importance of second-order learning—managing knowledge, usually by
placing responsibility for learning in the hands of an entity or agency—as opposed
to merely acquiring new knowledge about policy and practice (first-order
learning). Second-order learning refers to organizing and curating new
knowledge. We shall return to orders of learning in later chapters.
Type 2: cities in one-on-one exchange—ad hoc
and episodic
One-on-one exchanges take many forms. Perhaps the best known is twinning or
city-to-city exchange in a binary fashion. These have been practiced for many
decades, but started in earnest after World War II, as we saw in Chapter 2. Recent
versions have taken a new twist, adding strategic and longer-term objectives that
fulfill more programmatic needs of sponsoring entities, usually foreign assistance
agencies. Many governments, including those of France, the Netherlands, Sweden,
the UK and the US, make use of individual municipalities as technical agents of
foreign assistance to local governments in recipient countries. Two such programs
are illustrated below.
One of the oldest and most active is the VNG, the Association of Netherlands
Municipalities, established in 1912. VNG International has operated or coordinated
twinning assistance for local governments in the developing world since
1993. The most recent local government (LOGO) program, financed by the Dutch
Ministry of Foreign Affairs, is aimed at specific countries in the global South
(selected countries in Africa, the Americas, Asia and Eastern Europe). Based on
its experience in the Netherlands, the VNG has many years experience with
organizing direct inputs to local governments in developing countries by means
of leveraging Dutch municipal officials or technicians with their counterparts
abroad. Technical and managerial help on management, service delivery and
improvement of technical skills is provided by direct peer-to-peer contact during
short-term missions as well as exchange visits. The programs affect associations
60 Framing a view
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
and individual municipalities in scores of countries (just under 60 in the 2007–2010
period).
A second example is City Links, a smaller program of twinning operated since
1997 by the International City and County Managers Association (ICMA) with
USAID funding. Similar to the VNG, the ICMA is the professional and educational
organization for appointed managers, administrators and assistants in cities,
towns, counties and regional entities throughout the world. Since 1914, the ICMA
has provided technical and management assistance, training, and information
resources to its members and the local government community. The management
decisions made by the ICMA’s nearly 9000 members affect more than 100 million
individuals in thousands of communities—from small towns with populations of
a few hundred to metropolitan areas serving several million.
The ICMA’s City Links program (inaugurated in 1997 as the Resource Cities
Program) brings together the best management practitioners from the US with
officials from client cities of USAID in developing and transitional countries to
share resources and technical expertise with the aim of improving the lives of
urban residents.
The City Links program facilitates the exchange of teams of local government
officials—city managers, mayors and department heads—between US and overseas
cities during a period lasting anywhere from 18 to 24 months. The exchanges
enable officials to learn from their peers and adopt a pragmatic approach to
urban management problems. The partners develop a work plan with clear
objectives and expected outcomes to remedy whatever challenges the parties
had agreed to address. Program funds cover international travel and accommodation
costs, usually for trips by US staff to the host country and return trips
by counterparts to the US city. Local officials contribute their time, making the
program a cost-effective means to provide technical assistance to developing and
transitional countries.
The program has launched nearly 80 partnerships under a global cooperative
agreement. The partnerships address issues such as solid waste management,
budgeting and financial planning, downtown revitalization, citizen participation,
and water and wastewater treatment, among others. The collaborative effort
helps partnerships make significant changes in urban management overseas.
In twinning programs, assistance is agreed in the course of the first of several
preliminary site visits and, though it may be modified on the fly, is carried out in
several successive visits by practitioner experts from the “resource” city to the
other in the field, with return visits by field practitioners to the “resource” city.
Knowledge is transferred in a direct manner, from practitioner to practitioner.
The VNG and the ICMA cover distinct realms, but together include such things as
strategic planning, conducting surveys, cadastre updates and reforms, budget
A gamut of learning types 61
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
management and forecasting, incubators for local economic development, procurement
documents, auctioning public land, and so on.
For the most part, the city linkages achieve their objectives, usually two or
three discrete management or service-delivery issues. USAID has concluded that
when reforms are dramatic departures from conventional practice, as they were
with the land auctions in former Soviet states, they can set up powerful models
for change that other cities seek to achieve (USAID, 2001). Both the ICMA and
the VNG have found that partnerships often result in unanticipated benefits
to the overseas cities, for example, in management changes.
Several drawbacks limit learning. One problem with bilateral exchange is that
a fixed horizon limits contact and support. Twinning programs by their nature
are effective, but rather narrow in target, aiming to reach specific objectives in
management, services or technical skills. Administrative turnover is sometimes
a further limitation. US Sister Cities International learned this lesson long ago.
That program has concluded that the most effective solution to sustainability—
financial as well as institutional—is to build a relationship within the community,
and not just among city officials.2 Communities of interest become the glue of
sustainability. When new leaders are voted into office, the relationship does not
end. City-to-city relationships are important to a new mayor’s constituency,
without necessarily requiring a program commitment on the part of the mayor.
Additional problems arise from the tailor-made nature of assistance. Donor
countries take the lead on sponsorship and the design of interventions, if not on
execution, even though international agencies are well aware of the importance
of ownership on the part of the recipient. Also, because of the tailored nature
of direct help to local governments, the programs are limited in their reach.
Assistance to national associations, on the other hand, has a built-in leveraging
effect, since all members in the country are potential beneficiaries.
Type 3: city clusters on clusters
Learning through the mediation of international NGOs is fundamentally different
in several ways from the previous cases. First, the focus shifts away from the city
itself and moves instead to intermediate organizations. In effect, the agency of
learning is shared, sometimes led, by an external actor, usually an international
NGO. Second, network NGOs provide several forms of learning opportunities
not provided by active cities. Networks provide conventions and standards (e.g.,
World Heritage Cities conventions or Agenda 21 and C-40 programs focusing on
carbon footprint targets) as well as best practice and normative codes and legislation,
which establish a framework of policy or practice.
62 Framing a view
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
The Organization of World Heritage Cities (OWHC) is an example of a growing
international NGO that is instrumental in establishing a normative, even legal
framework concerning the management of culturally significant places. The
OWHC was established in 1993 to develop a sense of solidarity and a cooperative
relationship between World Heritage cities. Made up of 218 cities having sites
included on the UNESCO World Heritage List, the OWHC’s mission is to promote
the implementation of the World Heritage Convention by helping municipal
administrators access the information they need to meet this challenge. To this
end, the OWHC organizes symposia and seminars dealing with the challenges to
be met in the realm of management and strategies pertaining to the development
and preservation of historic sites.
The OWHC’s headquarters, located in Quebec City, Canada, organizes the
OWHC’s initiatives, which are geared to the implementation of the World
Heritage Convention. OWHC meetings lead to international conventions, some
of which have the moral force of law, which help cities understand the rights
and responsibilities of being designated as a World Heritage city. The OWHC
also strives to heighten awareness of the importance of protecting historic cities
among officials of the United Nations, UNESCO, the World Bank and the Council
of Europe. In the coming years, the organization is to focus on the establishment
of an electronic communications network linking member cities through the
internet, and the creation of a data bank on historic cities.
A good example is the city of Hué, Vietnam (Yang, 2002). A former imperial
capital of Vietnam, Hué was listed as a World Heritage city in 1993. Soon afterwards,
UNESCO, with support from the Republic of Korea, helped to set up a GIS
system to map the core area of Hué as a conservation management tool. However,
urban migration, demographic changes and tourism demands began to take a
toll on the city’s cultural heritage. In response to unregulated urban development
practices, UNESCO brokered a relationship between Hué and Lille Métropole in
France to help cope with planning and management issues. With the hope of
balancing protection with development needs, the collaborative effort began
with five pilot project sites to develop an urban inventory and diagnosis of preservation
priorities. The project engaged students from the Lille and Hué Schools of
Architecture.
Further collaboration with Lille, as well as French and Brazilian banks, the
city of Turin, and international development funds, facilitated the development
of a revolving loan fund for housing loans and subsidies. Such collaborations
helped generate a legal framework for urban conservation in Hué and have raised
awareness of the value of inter-agency partnerships within local government. It
has also spurred the city to engage citizens more actively in urban planning
initiatives, and given the Hué Heritage House (an important Vietnamese cultural
A gamut of learning types 63
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
center) an important role guiding the future of coordination of urban preservation
and development.
The ICLEI, now Agenda 21, is another important network, with more than
700 cities engaged in climate action. Originally the International Council on Local
Environmental Initiatives, the organization was formed in 1990 when its key
founder, Jeffery Brugmann, discovered that it was possible to affect behaviors
of cities—that is, to change operational policies—in a way that would have positive
impact on greenhouse gases. His experience with a single municipality in
Southern California mushroomed into a solid organization that made Local
Agenda 21 a cornerstone of its actions.
The ICLEI’s mandate has evolved to address the sustainable cities agenda. ICLEI
members carry out campaigns to improve environmental conditions.
A fundamental component of our performance-based campaign model is the milestone
process. Each campaign incorporates a five-milestone structure that participating local
governments work through: (1) establish a baseline; (2) set a target; (3) develop a local
action plan; (4) implement the local action plan; and (5) measure results.
(ICLEI, 2003: 8)
The ICLEI has developed a network of activists operating at the municipal level
in scores of cities around the globe to lobby city councils, provide public education,
and promote community support for environmental improvements. The ICLEI has
built up a database of more than 70 successful sustainable city case studies.
64 Framing a view
Box 4.1 Potchefstroom, South Africa
Potchefstroom is a rapidly urbanizing municipality in the Northern Cape
province of South Africa. In 2001, the medium-sized city of 125,000 joined
the ICLEI’s Cities for Climate Protection (CCP) program, which provides local
governments with a framework to identify GHG emissions while improving
local communities’ living conditions. Soon after, in 2002, Potchefstroom
volunteered to implement the ICLEI’s Local Agenda 21 to develop a comprehensive
sustainable development action plan. The subsequent integrated
development plan (IDP) included regulating local practices and standards
to reduce energy consumption, improve indoor air quality, and reduce
emissions and waste. The CCP provided the city with an approach and
case studies that helped Potchefstroom design and implement targeted
sustainability programs, including the design and construction of energyefficient
buildings, a tree-planting project, a program to upgrade streetlight
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
A second kind of service is the wide access to many different practitioners.
Occasional contact at large-scale conferences of membership and thematic organizations
creates a loose bond in networks. For instance the UCLG or Metropolis
semiannual meetings and Bertelsmann Cities of Change periodic meetings provide
an opportunity for “weak ties,” which in Granovetter’s logic is a source of fresh,
out-of-the-box thinking (Granovetter, 1973) and reference contacts for consultation
and advice.
Type 4: cities in active networks
Many other organizations offer platforms for learning by cities, even though
the primary objective is not learning per se. One study shows that since the 1980s
NGOs dedicated to city sustainability have flowered from a handful to more than
50 (Keiner and Kim, 2007). Examples include both national and international
associations. The Council of European Municipalities and Regions (CEMR) and
United Cities and Local Governments (UCLG) are two of the most visible in the
past decade. The CEMR represents some 100,000 local government units in Europe.
Most nations have local government associations of some kind.
UCLG, an NGO, is a confederation of national elected officials and local government
associations. It was organized to give political voice to local governments
at the regional and international levels and was launched in 1996 at the UN
Conference on Human Settlements held in Istanbul. The UCLG and Metropolis
were forged from the previous worldwide federations of the Union of Local
Authorities (of elected city representatives), Cités Unies/United Towns, and their
counterparts in the Arabic-speaking world and in sub-Saharan Africa. Today they
lobby for the interests of more than 10,000 local governments and officials and
regularly stage studies, seminars and learning events for their membership.
Many regional organizations—EUROCITIES, Merco-ciudades (an association
of cities in the Mercosur trading bloc) and CITYNET are good examples—also maintain
active networks of exchange in which apex secretariats sift demands and
problems from among the membership and frame learning events for cities in
A gamut of learning types 65
efficiency, the recovery of methane from a local sewage-filtration system,
and retro-fitting of the city airport’s infrastructure. According to local
reporting, the successful implementation of a sustainable development plan
led to a 39.8 percent reduction in the city’s carbon footprint in 2003.
Source: Du Plessis et al., 2004
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
their respective domains. Ishinabe provides a good review of Asian networks
(Ishinabe, 2010).
In this class of cases, networks, organized as secretariats with technical staff
of various sizes, are the centers of action. As opposed to passive networks (see
the next section, below) each of the regional organizations has the means, budget,
technical information, and staff to foster learning events that attract cities
as members and clients. The main dynamic of learning takes place in face-toface
meetings, in plenaries, parallel groups and myriad bilateral exchanges.
The importance of these groups is that the agenda is broadly agreed and
framed to serve the common interests of cities in relation to higher powers. Typical
topics of study include political issues such as federalism, finance and fiscal relations,
as well as technical areas of service delivery. The upshot for most members
is to build a common understanding about the role of cities and an agenda for
action at regional and global levels.
Type 5: cities in passive networks
In contrast to the active push of network clusters, discussed immediately above,
resources like the City Mayor website, UN-Habitat Best Practices, and Open
Society’s “LOGIN” websites on urban and technical issues operate in a more
passive mode. Organizations in this type of learning develop information that is
of interest to members and make it available—for those who wish to access it—
via electronic or print media, often reinforced by meetings.
UN-Habitat Best Practice is not the only award-conferring sponsor of best
practice cities, but it is certainly the best known globally. The structure resembles
(and may have been patterned after) the Kennedy School of Government
Innovations program for cities and counties. The Best Practices database features
winners of best practice selected by an international jury. Winners are posted on
the database with brief write ups. These are widely recognized, if not actively
promoted, by international agencies. The database does offer stimulating ideas
in many experiences, but there is little or no effort to certify or adopt awardwinning
practices as a standard of excellence and little evidence that these are
replicated or even followed up in any systematic way.
The Local Government Information Network (LOGIN) is a development partnership
to increase the flow of useful information and experience to those people
who develop, enact, implement and monitor policy. LOGIN can be characterized
as city network cooperation. LOGIN’s main objectives are to promote the
professional development of local government officials and to build their capacity
to make better policy decisions through large-scale, extensive provision of
66 Framing a view
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
information. Another purpose of the program is to strengthen the capabilities
of organizations that support the reform of public administration in the framework
of decentralization. LOGIN also aims at facilitating the exchange of best
practices and other policy-related information at inter- and intra-regional level
in the area of local governance.
Funding resources originate from local partner contributions and development
project and program funds, as well as from resources from foundations and trust
funds. LOGIN’s major financial support comes from Steering Committee member
organizations: the Open Society Institute, the UNDP, the Council of Europe, USAID
and the World Bank. Other donors include the Danish and Czech governments.
Local partner organizations also contribute to the program with their own
financial resources.
The Committee provides policy guidance and oversight for project implementation.
The LOGIN Program Manager prepares the agenda and background
materials for the meetings, which take place eight or nine times a year, using a
video conference facility. The Steering Committee makes its decisions by unanimous
vote (thus every member has the power of veto).
Both UN Best Practices and LOGIN enjoy recognition and a growing demand
from their respective constituents. Their survival and expansion attests to some
measure of success in filling an information niche in this “passive” segment of
the knowledge market.
A gamut of learning types 67
Box 4.2 Best practices awards
Every two years, up to 10 outstanding initiatives receive the Dubai International
Award for Best Practices to Improve the Living Environment, a
biennial environmental award established in 1995 by the Municipality of
Dubai, United Arab Emirates. Those initiatives meeting the criteria for a
Best Practice are included in the Best Practices database. The lessons learned
from selected best practices are analyzed and made available to other
countries, cities or communities. A searchable database contains over 2150
proven solutions from more than 140 countries to the common social, economic
and environmental problems of an urbanizing world. It demonstrates
the practical ways in which public, private and civil society sectors are
working together to improve governance, eradicate poverty, provide access
to shelter, land and basic services, protect the environment and support
economic development.
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
Observations from cases
This typology illustrates the widely varying arrangements in which cities tap
knowledge and effect learning. The “universe” considered here is not exhaustive,
but it is reasonably representative of typical arrangements reported by practitioners,
field observers and academics. The important point about this collection
of learning modalities is not simply the examples that are described. They are
representative, but are only single cases, and scores operate in each category.
The types of city learning differ in important dimensions: in purpose; sponsorship;
mechanics of learning, including first- and second-order learning; and
whether or not institutional capacity is affected.
Why learn?
Cities will learn by accident, but they can learn in deeply transforming ways if
they see a purpose in doing so. Finding the reason to learn, and assembling a
platform that reflects the common interests of key stakeholders, constitute
indispensable parts of the process. Bilbao is a good place to start on the question
of motive. That city’s leadership elite foresaw a pending crisis and successfully
mobilized broad-based support to take action and avert an economic meltdown.
Seattle’s motivation was similarly triggered by the recession in 1993 and layoffs
by Boeing. But the purpose of learning among Seattle elites was one of understanding
competition. In Bilbao, the purpose moved into wholesale retooling
of the city. The one-on-one relationships in City Links, Sister Cities International,
and other binary exchanges are typified by smaller-scale objectives, such as the
practical issues of framing a plan, getting educated on best practice in land use,
adaptation to climate change, or managerial issues.
The point is not how big the problem, but how big the motivation. When
purpose is not clear, or motivation not widely shared, learning does not get
started. The first step is often identifying a problem. Much of the literature on
learning regions and firms starts with the issue of economic survival, and this can
be seen in some cases discussed here as well. On the other hand, many cases of
failure—in the City Links, for instance—were traced to difficulty in reaching an
agreement, or even the absence of an agreement, about whether a problem
had existed in the first place (USAID, 2001).
68 Framing a view
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
Agency, mandate, leadership and support
Four key features stand out in the city agencies that are responsible for learning:
leadership, mandate and focus of actions, plan and time horizon, and degree of
community engagement.
In the case of types 1 through 4—direct agents, binary pairing, one on many,
and clusters—the leading force has been a collection of stakeholders, a small cadre
of individuals who share a vision or commitment to a long-term goal. But it
is implied that broad-based community support lies behind most of these cases.
In the case of Curitiba, where a small number of individuals were identified with
that city’s success, the leadership changed hands over the years but the fundamental
direction was sustained by broad-based community support, reaffirmed
periodically at the ballot box. We shall learn more about these dynamics in
Chapter 7.
On the other hand, the formality of arrangements was mixed in types 1 and
2. Seattle’s group was organized by an institution (the Chamber of Commerce of
Greater Seattle and later, the Trade Development Alliance), but members in the
group participated on an informal basis. The Seattle case demonstrates the construction
of a governing elite, teaching itself the ways of the world by going and
looking. In effect, the city has deputized the TDA to be its scout, and has engaged
in shared values of exploration and bonding to build a leadership group and loose
governance structure. In contrast, Bilbao’s Metropoli-30 was highly organized,
with staff, budget, responsibilities, and a mandate that was geared to form the
big picture. In Curitiba, a strong internal focus and specific organizational arrangements
were drawn up to protect the agency from political manipulation.
The reliance on external agents by the other learning types, 2 through 4, brings
inherent risks. Partly because of external agency with accountabilities related to
public budgets, these efforts focused on a comparatively narrow set of objectives.
Types 2 through 4 are also subject to extraneous forces that make it difficult to
sustain learning over time. Further, because external organizations like UCLG
are viable only with economies of scale, they tend to be less focused on the needs
of specific places. Progressively, the active and, in an even more pronounced
way, the passive networks rely on the initiative of cities themselves to access
information and knowledge about best practice.
This is not to say that passive sources of knowledge cannot play an important
role in inspiring new ideas, even for the active type 1 and 2 cases. Granovetter’s
idea of weak ties bridging to novel information is one route to discovery.
Numerous examples of this kind were documented in a World Bank research
project on innovation in decentralized settings. Sources of inspiration for innovative
leaders were frequently an idea or practice found outside the immediate
A gamut of learning types 69
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
setting, and often in international settings discovered by accident. For example,
the city of Tijuana drew on ballot referendum as seen in neighboring California
as a way to demonstrate public support for indebtedness (Campbell, 2001).
Leadership by individuals or small groups needs to drive the effort forward,
and even cities with strong leaders cannot move far without support from the
larger community. Single leaders do not succeed by themselves. The best efforts,
as shown in the learning city-regions and managed networks, are those that
consist of a group that sees its own self-interest aligned with the larger interests
of the city. At the same time, as illustrated by Seattle and Bilbao, without concrete
achievements it is unlikely that broad-based community support can be sustained.
Of equal importance is the extent to which the cities have nurtured broad
community support into the learning effort. The type 1 and 2 cities in this review
are clearly engaged in dedicated institutional capacity building that extends far
beyond agency boundaries. The most active cities were also the most concerned
with community participation, but civic involvement did not extend to citywide
consultations. The focus was on blending key leadership groups and cutting across
bureaucratic walls. Indeed in the Seattle case, one of the objectives of study
tours is to create a permeable layer across boundaries of all kinds, including
jurisdictional, agency and public–private realms. The most purposeful of these
cases—represented in different ways by Bilbao, Seattle and Curitiba, among many
others—are cities that are able to create learning experiences and draw on stored
memory in order to bring that knowledge to bear on present and newly emerging
problems.
Mechanics of learning
A key feature highlighted in this typology is the degree to which the city or agency
takes the initiative to learn deliberately. The most intensive learners are those
proactive cities categorized in types 1 and 2. They share several distinguishing
features.
Perhaps the most important is the extent to which a city commits to learning
as a continuing practice. Cities can opt for a style that sets up a system that
generates its own knowledge internally, or seeks knowledge from outside its
domain. Cases range from benchmarking and competitiveness in types 1 and 2,
to the search for best practices and specific techniques in types 3, 4 and 5. Cities
operate with different formulations of the sources of knowledge.
Types 1 and 2 have demonstrated styles of finding knowledge at its origin
and either bringing it home or sending a legation for study at its source. Bilbao
brought experience from many quarters to its stakeholders at home. Seattle is
70 Framing a view
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
singular in the cases reviewed here in demonstrating a commitment to see best
practice in its native habitat. Other cities not reviewed here—Johannesburg and
Barcelona, for example—also recruited world-class sources of information for
presentation to the home team.
The regularity of learning events, their duration, and follow-up activities are
another signal feature of the most active learners. Regular, long-term, sequential
and follow-up activities have all proved important for the active cities. These same
traits will emerge again in the following chapters as indicators of serial learning
cities.
It should be noted that the source of knowledge in virtually all of the cases
is overwhelmingly from other cities. Though many avenues are available to
transmit information and experience—policy seminars, conferences, small group
meetings—virtually all of the official development assistance organizations rely
on city-to-city exposure as a key ingredient. In all of these cases, knowledge agents
play an important role, for instance, international organizations such as in the
UN family, as well as specialized organizations working on environmental, governance
or other issues.
Type 1 and 2 cities also featured high-level persons in both public and private
sectors as regular participants in the learning process. Exposure to new ideas in
their native context enriches the Arthur Koestler “aha” experience, especially if
this takes place in the company of a core leadership group, as in the case of Seattle.
City Rounds in the World Bank Institute endorse the importance of observing best
practice in the native setting of the practitioner.3 Learning practitioners know
that context is everything in the understanding of how things fit together and
where the weak points are likely to be. In the words of Bill Stafford, Seattle
Trade Development Alliance:
Cities learn from each other because they understand and trust each other more than
commercial firms that have something to sell or even international institutions which are
laying conditions on lending.4
First- and second-order learning
Recall that first-order learning consists of discovery and findings about things and
processes. It entails questions like: Does it work? How much does it cost? What
is the payback? Can it be implemented back home? Virtually all of the types
discussed in this chapter satisfy first-order learning to some degree. But it is what
I call the second-order products of learning that determine the outcomes for
cities. What counts over the long term are the very processes entailed in the
exploration—to use those words often cited in Seattle, “building relationships”
A gamut of learning types 71
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
internally, and “getting to know who we are.” These second-order effects turn
out to be the most important. All learning cities construct a way to conduct interchange
among themselves, the visiting team, task forces or work groups. The
highest pay off results more from a focused, dedicated effort that is sustained
over time. Further, the larger the group, the better is the outcome. Sending a
scout can work; sending a posse is better. A large, cross-cutting delegation enables
the formation of trusting relationships.
Institution building—managing knowledge
The special-purpose agencies show that cities dedicated to learning invest in policy
and in a learning effort that is sustained over a long period of time. Seattle is
running into its second decade of sustained policy support to learn, Bilbao is entering
its third, and Curitiba its fifth. Some form of institutionalization is achieved.
In London, it was the Economic Intelligence Unit; in Barcelona it is the metropolitan
planning organization. Financial support is supplied in different ways. Seattle
employs a pay-as-you-go scheme; Bilbao drew cleverly on EU funds, incurred debt,
and solicited private donations; London dipped into its own city budget; and
Barcelona’s metropolitan planning unit is shared by the city, the surrounding
municipalities and the province.
Summing up and looking ahead
The gamut of learning types helps us see the range of effort, the form of agency,
the purpose of learning, and the means of support. Of course, many other subcategories
of learning types can be imagined. In particular, virtual learning has
been excluded as a type here. It is rapidly growing because virtual or distance
learning has several attractive features, low cost being one of the most important.
Virtual learning is particularly apt for technical skills and for applications where
a team has already been formed. But distance learning is limited in other ways.
Because it is often geared to technical skills, higher-level managers are frequently
reluctant to join. The ideas of learning that we are pursuing in these chapters
focus partly on the very formation of organizational tissue. This requires
assembling minds from across many departments and disciplines and walks
of life.
In fact, most cities in the survey described in the following chapter are on
the hunt for first-order outcomes. Beyond those sizeable numbers of cities that
conduct visits are many more that take part in less active ways, monitoring and
72 Framing a view
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
exchanging information organized along thematic or geographic lines. The many
urban membership associations, together with sector-specific agendas, like sustainability,
health and clean air, all sponsor and actively promote circulation of
information through meetings, conferences, seminars and reports.
The gamut of learners presented in this chapter highlights the proactive types
that invest in learning by organizing a systematic effort. The examples in this
category are well known, but how many others are like them? We find some
answers in the next chapter.
Notes
1 The Trade Development Alliance has also helped trade development missions, separate
from its study tour mandate. The TDA organized 26 outbound missions in its 10 years
of operation and assisted in the development of 14 others.
2 Personal communication, Tim Honey, former executive director, Sister Cities
International.
3 City Rounds involved city-to-city visits and presentations by experts and practitioners
from peer cities. See www.worldbank.org/wbi/urban.
4 Personal communication, Bill Stafford, Trade Development Alliance.
References
Campbell, T. (2001). “Innovation and risk-taking: urban governance in Latin America,” in
A. Scott (ed.), Global city-regions—trends, theory, policy, Oxford University Press, New
York, pp. 214–235.
Campbell, T. (2006). “Smart cities—the case of Bilbao,” Urban Land, 65, pp. 56–59.
Du Plessis, A., E. Le Roux, W. B. P. Bluemer and J. Lommen (2004). “Greener governance in
southern SADC: success report on medium sized local authorities,” North West University,
Potchefstroom, South Africa.
Granovetter, M. (1973). “The strength of weak ties,” The American Journal of Sociology,
78, pp. 1360–1380.
ICLEI (International Council of Local Environmental Initiatives) (2003). 2003 triennial report.
Local governments implementing sustainable development, International Council of
Local Environmental Initiatives, Toronto, p. 28.
Ishinabe, N. (2010). “Analysis of international city-to-city cooperation and intercity networks
for Japanese national and local governments,” Institute for Global Environmental
Strategies (IGES) Discussion Paper, Hayama, Japan.
Keiner, M. and A. Kim (2007). “Transnational city networks for sustainability,” European
Planning Studies, 15, pp. 1360–1395.
A gamut of learning types 73
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
Stafford, W. (1999). “Globally competitive regions: What Seattle is learning from the rest
of the world” (pamphlet), Trade Development Alliance of Greater Seattle.
Trade Development Alliance (2001). “Crossroads10!,” in Trade Development Alliance of
Greater Seattle (ed.) Crossroads, Trade Development Alliance of Greater Seattle, Seattle.
UN-Habitat and United Towns Organization (2001). “City-to-city cooperation: issues arising
from experience,” UN-Habitat, Nairobi.
USAID (2001). “Evaluation of resource cities program design,” Washington, DC.
Yang, M. (2002). “Protecting the urban morphology of Asian cities,” in World heritage 2002:
shared legacy, common responsibility, UNESCO World Heritage Centre, Urbino, Italy,
pp. 30–31.
74 Framing a view
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
5 Light on a shadow economy: city learning
in 53 cities1
The previous chapter focused on proactive cities. They devote effort to learning
in a deliberate and systematic way. But how common are they? Are these just a
handful of outliers? A more basic question is: How widespread is city-to-city
exchange and to what extent are less proactive cities also in the mix?
If there is any doubt about the level of activity as regards cities as learners,
this chapter should shift the debate. It’s not whether, but how much. The quantitative
evidence in the following pages demonstrates a previously unreported
flurry of business being undertaken by cities as they exchange ideas with each
other. Cities of all sizes and from all geographical regions are engaged in shopping
at a bazaar of knowledge. The data in this chapter show the pace of knowledge
gathering among cities. They form a picture of eager traders, on the prowl to
learn new ideas, accumulate experience, understand the pitfalls of policy, examine
technical solutions, and find shortcuts to solve the problems they face at home.
Curiously, this exchange is being undertaken largely outside the policy vision of
nations and international financial and technical assistance organizations. The
chapter also throws further light on proactive learners: How do they consolidate
their learning? What topics are of greatest interest to them? How much effort
they put into learning?
Pulling back the curtain
Curious about the growing evidence of city-to-city exchange, in 2004, together
with Sylvia Blanco at the University of Washington, I organized a systematic survey
of visits from other cities to Seattle. Our aim was to tabulate the number and
types of incoming city delegations on technical visits, as opposed to cultural,
ceremonial or friendship exchanges.
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
The number and range of visits were startling. We found that in the year
2002 Seattle hosted more than 150 delegations, mostly from outside the US.
Visiting delegations averaged seven persons per group and stayed around four
days. We are sure that this was an undercount, because our database did not
reflect a full 12 months and missed a number of city departments.
The delegations consisted largely of technical and policy teams, mostly from
Asia, and covered topics in governance and policy, private–public cooperation,
legal and regulatory systems, health care, primary and secondary education, environmental
quality, and community-based planning. One group of visiting Chinese
city officials illustrates a typical harvest. The official responsible for litter removal
mentioned that he had several thousand workers in his department and was
baffled to see why his Seattle counterpart had less than a few dozen. The answer
he got brought an “aha” expression to his face. The several dozen Seattle workers
concentrate on public education, especially in schools. Mechanized equipment
does the rest.
I found that anecdotal evidence from other cities corroborated a high flow
rate of visitors. Similar volumes of visits were reported by Baltimore, Barcelona,
London, Stockholm, Toronto and Vancouver. Each of these cities has reported
significant numbers of visits from their urban counterparts elsewhere in the
world. Many host cities handle these exchanges though international affairs
divisions. The city of Stockholm maintains a fee structure designed to cover
administrative and overhead costs connected to the provision of services to visiting
delegations.
The numbers from the Seattle study formed the basis for a wider, more comprehensive
survey of city-to-city exchange. As part of the background research
for this book, a web-based survey was conducted during the period 2007–2009
to throw new light on the extent and outcomes of city learning.2 The data reveal
thousands of technical visits annually. Cities ranging in size from less than 100,000
to 10 million have formed a market of exchange operating in the shadows.
Survey of city learners—a word on methods
We saw in Chapter 4 that leading cities invest substantial human and financial
resources in learning. How wide is this practice and what modalities of learning
are involved? Is it all twinning and single-city missions, as in Seattle? Or are university
studies, private consulting firms and in-house expertise also playing a role?
The survey aimed to answer these questions and to probe in a preliminary fashion
whether city size, wealth or some other characteristics, particularly innovation
and reform, might be associated with pace and mode of learning.
76 Framing a view
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
The survey was distributed to about 300 cities in two waves by means of
intermediaries, mostly membership associations of cities such as UCLG, Metropolis,
CITYNET in Yokohama, and the Administrative Staff College of India (ASCI),
among others. I also made contact with many city executives with whom I had
worked in the past. Each organization was asked to identify knowledgeable
respondents from selected cities drawn from among their respective membership
bases in order to capture a representative distribution by size.
The 48 cities that responded fit a smooth bell-curve by size, but are concentrated
in Asia, Europe and Latin America (only one response was received from
Africa and one from North Africa). The survey did not pretend to collect an official
response from the city, but rather to gauge level and type of learning in cities by
knowledgeable officials or semi-official professionals working in or for the city.
Respondents included mayors, other elected officials, advisors, consultants or city
officers. The list of cities and categories of size and region, among others (as
explained below), are in Appendix 2.
Several steps were taken to limit biases and errors intrinsic to this indirect,
single-respondent approach. First is the problem of representing a complex
organization—a city that can involve scores, if not hundreds, of departments
and units—by a single respondent. Survey takers were asked to base their
responses on their personal experience with the city, but where relevant they
were asked to speak for the city as a whole to the best of their knowledge (for
instance, to report or estimate the number of learning events for the entire city
and whether learning was recorded and documented in some way by the city).
For the most part, respondents were high-level officials or advisors, but we cannot
be completely sure that the quality of information they provided is even across
all survey takers.
A second problem is the self-declarative nature of the survey. It relies on
individuals, and the idiosyncrasies of judgment, to classify important information.
For example, respondents were asked to gauge the amount of time they spent
learning, how many trips their city had made in the previous three years, and
whether their city could be classified as a reformer or not (detail on this question
is covered later). In each of these instances, the questions were explained and
guidance was given in written form. Triangulation and spot checking on known
city reforms are the main means of cross-checking answers for accuracy and consistency.
Another issue is small sample size. Though it has some value in terms of statistical
significance for testing hypotheses, the findings are also rich with suggestive
clues and provide useful benchmarks and directions for further work. An additional
issue may be that individuals were specially selected by intermediaries
(explained below), with a consequent bias.
Light on a shadow economy 77
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
To limit these possible drawbacks, detailed instructions and selection criteria
were provided to the intermediary organizations, explaining the purpose and
offering guidelines for survey takers.
The central questions in the inquiry are aimed at understanding the importance
of learning as a deliberate activity of cities and to explore what is specific
to proactive cities. After many years of working with cities in the World Bank,
and with city-based organizations like Sister Cities International, the ICMA, the
VNG in the Netherlands and others, I was quite sure that cities were engaged in
a significant level of learning activity. But I was not quite so sure about the mix
and intensity of exchange. An important debate was shaping up about North–
South relations, and a growing unease about whether yet another form of
dependency was emerging at the city level. Also, were proactive cities translating
the knowledge they picked up into innovation or reform? Do reformers assign
more time and attention to the learning process than non-reformers?
Findings—how much exchange?
One of the foremost concerns was to quantify the number of learning exchanges
being undertaken by cities. To measure this, survey takers were asked how they
learned, what kinds of learning they liked, and how much of it was city to city.
The survey takers were asked to indicate how many trips were made by their
respective cities over the previous three years, taking into account tours and visits
at the national or international level to other cities. These were to include visits
to companies, universities or development assistance organizations for policy or
technical purposes.
The initial responses were puzzling. The data showed that almost all of the
respondents indicated that their city engaged in more than 10 city-to-city learning
events per year. The range of responses offered to respondents was based on
numerous case observations (in Toronto, Stockholm and Baltimore) and case study
findings in Seattle, Bilbao and Curitiba. The range turned out to be far too limited
(see Table 5.1).
Recall that the survey was administered in two waves. In the initial phase,
responding cities were all bunched at the upper end of the scale, i.e., more than
10 per year. The range was expanded in the second wave (26 additional cities in
2009) so that respondents could register up to 30 visits per year. The data showed
that more than 40 percent of the second wave of survey takers fell also into the
even higher end of the scale on numbers of visits.
Despite this rather untidy process, the results are startling. If these survey data
are even reasonably representative of the total volume of city-to-city exchanges
78 Framing a view
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
being undertaken around the globe, the total numbers for cities of substantial
size, say, a quarter million or more, of which more than 1000 are currently on
the planet, then the traffic in visits could be in the neighborhood of tens of
thousands per year: a high—and heretofore unrecognized—volume of exchange.
But how is it possible that a city conducts dozens or scores of visits a year?
The answer is that large cities, those with more than 500,000 in population, have
thousands of employees in scores of departments. For instance, a typical millionsize
city has departments on the order of 10 to 20 that cover finance, land registry,
parks, markets, public transit, business licensing, water, sewerage, power, social
welfare, housing, local economic development, personnel, administration, and
others. Larger cities work with semi-dependent entities that handle utilities,
transportation, telecommunications and other services. Each of these has its own
internal structure of management and administration.
In addition, the private sector typically organizes visits, often in conjunction
with the conduct of trade and commerce in the city. These in turn are often linked
to conferences of some kind. And, by the way, the sponsor or organizer of the
outgoing missions very much shapes the content and prospects for long-term
learning, as we shall see in the case studies presented in Part III. Several small
delegations from chambers of commerce, plus the multitude of city departments,
plus higher-level delegations, quickly bring up the total. Delegations in the visits
can be small, from a couple of department heads to 20 or 30 or more. Turin,
Barcelona and Seattle annually organize delegations of up to 100 persons. The
Light on a shadow economy 79
Table 5.1 Number of study tours and exchanges
Scale used on First-wave total Scale used on Second-wave total
first-wave N=27 (%) second-wave N=26 (%)
number of trips number of trips
in past three in past year
years (%)
None 0 None 0
1–10 0 1–5 4
More than 10 59 6–10 25
Don’t know 7 11–15 8
No answer 33 16–20 4
21–30 17
More than 30 42
Don’t know 0
Source: Author
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
documentation of visits to Seattle referred to in an earlier chapter suggested that
the 150 visits to that city consisted of an average of seven persons staying four
nights. If these numbers were typical, the expenditures of study tours could easily
be in the range of US$100 million per year.3
Findings—content, processing, proactive reformers
The survey was designed to see whether the typology used in the previous chapter
would hold up in a wider survey. To address this question of proactive reformers,
respondents were asked to “self-declare” whether their city was a reformer or
non-reformer. In this chapter and elsewhere, I use the term “reform” synonymously
with the term “innovation.” In cities, making change in policy or practice
is often, if not always, an innovative application of a proven idea or practice. My
scale of measurement is very crude. Those cities indicating that “many” innovations
or reforms were undertaken in the previous three years are classified as
“reformers.” Those recording “some,” “few” or “none” were, for purposes of
analysis, categorized as non-reformers. Half the responding cities fell into each
category of “reformer” and “non-reformer.”
Spot checks of many of the cities show that, with some notable exceptions,
the reformers line up quite well with anecdotal evidence of cities that have
demonstrated innovation and reform. One of the exceptions is Stockholm. Its
survey respondent declared that Stockholm made only one or two reforms in
the past three years. While this might be true in the strict sense of the term,
Stockholm accomplished major reforms in congestion charging and other changes
over the past decade. Turin is another example: its respondent declared it a nonreformer,
even though Turin achieved major changes in strategic planning and
the Olympic Games in the dozen years prior to 2005. Survey takers appear to have
been observing the instructions rigorously.
One question of immediate interest is how reformers match up with those
proactive learners introduced in the previous chapter. Having observed that
Seattle and other cities mulled over and deliberated their experiences after study
tours, I tightened the definition of proactive cities using a composite indicator.
First, proactive cities are those taking more than 10 visits per year. Second, they
have accomplished many or some reforms in the previous three years. Third, they
take steps to institutionalize their learning, for instance, by establishing an office,
or routinely following up their learning events with home-based seminars or
conferences. We shall see that many also document learning by writing up reports,
or otherwise follow up with monitoring new ideas or tracking newly implemented
projects (see Table 5.2 for a list of 17 proactive cities).
80 Framing a view
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
Our definition of proactive learning cities is narrowed down qualitatively
and quantitatively. These are cities for the most part with populations of over a
million. Some cities, like Turin and Stockholm, are not on the list because they
did not define themselves as proactive. More than half are from the developing
world. In any case, proactive cities make an effort, deliberately and continuously,
to capture knowledge. They seek ideas from many sources, and most of them visit
other cities for this purpose. They rank city-to-city exchange as having the highest
pay-off for learning (this point is taken up in greater detail, below). Also, proactive
cities process their ideas by following up on the ideas that have been discovered,
Light on a shadow economy 81
Table 5.2 Seventeen proactive cities, innovation, and institutional practices
City Pop. Reformer Has Holds Agency Follows Tracks
(million) office own documents
sessions
Amman 2.8 1 1 2 1 0 0
Bangkok 6.3 1 1 2 0 0 1
Barcelona 1.6 1 1 1 1 1 0
Charlotte 0.71 1 2 1 1 1 0
Da Nang 0.75 1 1 2 1 1 1
Madrid 3.3 1 1 1 1 1 1
Manila City 2.5 1 1 1 1 1 1
Paris region 11.6 1 1 1 1 1 0
San Salvador 1.5 1 1 1 1 1 0
Toronto 5.5 1 1 1 1 1 0
Berlin 4.2 2 1 1 1 1 1
Buenos 2.5 2 2 2 1 1 1
Aires, DF
Istanbul 8 2 1 2 0 1 0
Kathmandu 0.67 2 1 2 0 0 1
Mashhad 2.4 2 1 1 1 1 1
Naga City 0.1 2 1 2 0 0 1
Seoul Metro 23.9 2 1 1 1 0 1
Key:
Reformer: 1 = many reforms in the past three years; 2 = some.
Office: 1 = has designated department (office) and officer to manage learning; 2 = has no office.
Holds own sessions: 1 = holds many learning sessions at home; 2 holds some, few or none.
Agency documents learning: 1 = sending agency documents, learning visits; 0 = does not comment.
Follow-up on learning: 1 = yes; 0 = no.
Tracks lessons and monitors innovations: 1 = yes; 0 = no.
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
for instance, by organizing seminars and conferences or meetings to deepen the
understanding of new knowledge. These activities (which I refer to as “agency”)
are usually associated with one another.4 Moreover, documenting learning and
tracking outcomes are also good predictors of reformer cities.5
We know, however, that merely writing down lessons and tracking their
outcomes already presumes substantial institutional capacity. We have pulled
back one layer of the onion of soft infrastructure only to be confronted with
another set of questions about how this capacity gets established. Getting a
start on learning can be as simple as assigning this function to a relevant part of
the city, or alternatively to a university or NGO. Part III is composed of case studies
that explore these stories in greater detail. Without getting ahead of myself, let
us say for the moment that the cases will show many ways of getting the job done.
Moreover, the stories illustrate the vital importance of a complementary form of
storage—what I call soft storage in personal networks—as part of the mechanism
of learning and innovation.6
Proactive cities and innovation
Though Table 5.2 shows that proactive cities are reformers, it is also true that
nearly as many cities with records of reform are not proactive, in that they visit
less frequently or do not take steps to establish an office or conduct follow-up
efforts. In part, this ambiguous finding is also a result of the blunt definitions for
“reform” and “innovation” that I have used in the survey. The idea was to separate
the very active reformers from the pack. I’m afraid I succeeded only partially.
The data and cases show that these relationships of gathering knowledge, storing
it, and translating it into innovation or reform are more nuanced. Measurement
of innovation and reform requires more careful specification. Still, we find many
intriguing and some quite strong and statistically significant relationships from
the survey, and these help us to focus on details in case studies and policy. With
this in mind, let’s push forward to find out more about the patterns of learning.
Patterns in geography
Survey respondents named on average more than four sources of knowledge; the
range was 0–10. Mapped schematically in a way that more or less shows the cities’
relative geographic positions, Figure 5.1 produces a complicated picture. Visiting
cities are represented in red; hosts in blue. Reformers are shown as diamonds.
The graphic shows that cities are crossing the globe as they visit both reformers
82 Framing a view
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
Amman
Athens, US
Bangkok
Barcelona
Berlin
Bogota
Brussels Region
Buenos Aires, DF
Cebu City
Charlotte
Colombo
Da Nang
Dakar Region
Hanoi
Honolulu Hyderabad
Istanbul Metro Incheon
Kathmandu
Kobe
Madrid
Manila City
Mashhad
Melbourne
Mexico Metro
Naga City
Paris Region
Phnom Penh
Portland
Salt Lake City
San Salvador
Santa Cruz, BO
Seattle
Seoul Metro
Stockholm
Surabaya
Tabriz
Tehran
Toronto
Turin
Ulaanbaatar
Abruzze
Amsterdam
Anchorage
Atlanta
Auckland
Beijing
Bilbao
Bologna
Boston
Budapest
Busan
Cambridge
Chicago
Choibalsan
Chongqing
Cleveland
Copenhagen
Curitiba
Darkhan
Denver
Detroit
Edinburgh
Essen
Florence
Florianopolis
Fredericton Frankfurt Freiberg
Fukuoka
Geneva
Goteborg
Guangzhou
Hanover
Helsinki
Hong Kong
Hubli Dharward
Indianapolis
Jeju
Johannesburg
Kandahar
Kiev
Kitakyushu
Kochi
Kyoto
Lille
Lima
London
Los Angeles
Lyon
Makati
Malmo
Marikina
Marseille
Mazatlan
Mazovie
Medellín
Miami
Minneapolis
Montevideo
Montréal
Moscow
Munich
Nanjing
New York
Odense
Pasig
Philadelphia
Phoenix
Porto Alegre
Québec
Quezon City
Rabat Rome
Rosario
Rotterdam Sainshand
San Diego
San Francisco
San Jose
Sao Paulo
Savannah
Metro
Seville
Shanghai
Singapore
Sofia
St. Louis
The Hague Stuttgart
Ulsan Tokyo
Vancouver
Warsaw
Xiamen
Yokohama
Figure 5.1 Global perspective of city visits
Key: red = visiting city; blue = host; diamond = reformer
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
Amman
Athens, US
Bangkok
Barcelona
Berlin
Bogota
Brussels Region
Buenos Aires, DF
Cebu City
Charlotte
Colombo
Da Nang
Dakar Region
Hanoi
Honolulu
Hyderabad
Incheon
Istanbul
Istanbul Metro
Kathmandu
Kobe
Madrid
Manila City
Mashhad
Melbourne
Mexico DF
Mexico Metro
Naga City
Paris Region
Pateros
Phnom Penh
Portland
Salt Lake City
San Salvador
Santa Cruz, BO
Seattle
Seoul Metro
Stockholm
Surabaya
Tabriz
Toronto
Turin
Ulaanbaatar
Abruzze
Amsterdam
Anchorage
Atlanta
Auckland
Beijing
Bilbao
Bologna
Boston
Budapest
Busan
Cambridge
Chicago
Choibalsan
Chongqing
Cleveland
Copenhagen
Curitiba
Darkhan
Denver
Detroit
Edinburgh
Erdenet
Essen
Florence
Florianopolis
Frankfurt
Fredericton
Freiberg
Fukuoka
Geneva
Goteborg
Guangzhou
Hanover
Helsinki
Hong Kong
Hubli Dharward
Indianapolis
Jeju
Johannesburg
Kandahar
Kiev
Kitakyushu
Kochi
Kyoto
Lille
Lima
London
Los Angeles Lyon
Makati
Malmo
Marikina
Marseille
Mazatlan
Mazovie
Medellín
Miami
Minneapolis
Montevideo
Montréal
Moscow
Munich
Nanjing
New York
Odense
Pasig
Philadelphia
Phoenix
Porto Alegre
Québec
Quezon City
Rabat
Rome
Rotterdam Rosario
Sainshand
San Diego
San Jose San Francisco
Sao Paulo
Savannah
Scandinavia
Seville
Shanghai
Singapore
Sofia
St. Louis
Stuttgart
The Hague
Tokyo
Ulsan
Vancouver
Warsaw
Washington, DC
Xiamen
Yokohama
Figure 5.2 Global perspective with peripheral clusters
Key: blue = global South; red = global North
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
and non-reformers. Some of the more popular hosts—for instance, Singapore in
the lower center-right—have not been classified in terms of reform.
A different way of picturing the exchanges brings out other details. Figure
5.2 makes it clear that some cities stick close to home; for instance, Surabaya
stayed within its region, and Ulaanbataar (bottom left) visited only cities in
Mongolia.
Larger host cities tend to be regional favorites—like Seoul and Singapore in
East Asia; Vancouver in North America; and London, Paris, Berlin and Barcelona
in Europe. A third pattern is that intermediate cities do cut across regions in their
visits; for instance, Santa Cruz (upper right) and Tabriz (center right).
Greater detail about North–South exchange is shown in Figure 5.3. Northern
cities are depicted at the top of the graph and Southern on the bottom. Visiting
cities show distinct preferences about where they choose to go. Even the reformers
and non-reformers favor Northern neighbors over those in the South. These
revealed preferences are somewhat out of sync with those of development
assistance agencies, especially given the recent interest among agencies in supporting
South–South exchange.
Table 5.3 synthesizes the information in Figure 5.3. Travel takes place in all
directions, but on balance cities in both North and South favor the North. A sharp
distinction can be seen between reformer cities and the observed direction of
travel. While those cities claiming to have made reforms are evenly split between
the North and South, non-reformers are much more likely to be in the South (Table
5.4). This raises important questions—not just about South–South exchange, but
about exchange in all directions. Are the lessons being transmitted the “right”
lessons? Is good practice being exchanged or should we be worrying that cities
are regressing to a mean, or worse, racing to the bottom?
Figures 5.4 and 5.5 provide more detail on the inter-regional exchange of visits,
giving more clarity about how much of the exchange stays within the Asian and
European regions, respectively. The figures also show the most popular sites for
visits, suggesting that regional “hubs” may be important as learning centers.
Light on a shadow economy 85
Table 5.3 Direction of visitor flows
Hosts
North South
Visitors North 74 14
South 62 49
Pearson coefficient 18.9. Sig = <0.0001
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
Amman
Athens, US
Bangkok
Barcelona
Berlin
Bogota
Brussels Region
Buenos Aires, DF
Cebu City
Charlotte
Colombo
Da Nang
Dakar Region
Hanoi
Honolulu
Hyderabad
Incheon
Istanbul
Istanbul Metro
Kathmandu
Kobe
Madrid
Manila City
Mashhad
Melbourne
Mexico DF
Mexico Metro
Naga City
Paris Region
Phnom Penh
Portland
Salt Lake City
San Salvador
Santa Cruz, BO
Seattle
Seoul Metro
Stockholm
Surabaya
Tabriz
Toronto
Turin
Ulaanbaatar
Amsterdam Abruzze
Anchorage
Atlanta
Auckland
Beijing
Bilbao
Bologna
Boston
Budapest
Busan
Cambridge
Chicago
Choibalsan
Chongqing
Cleveland
Copenhagen
Curitiba
Darkhan
Denver
Detroit
Edinborough
Erdenet
Florence
Florianopolis
Frankfurt
Fredericton
Frieberg
Fukuoka
Geneva
Goteborg
Guangzhou
Hanover
Helsinki
Hong Kong
Hubli Dharward
Indianapolis
Jeju
Johannesburg
Khandahar
Kiev
Kitakyushu
Kochi
Kyoto
Lille
Lima
London
Los Angeles
Lyon
Makati
Malmo
Marikina
Marseille
Mazatlan
Mazovie
Medellín
Miami
Minneapolis
Montevideo
Montréal
Moscow
Munich
Nanjing
New York
Odense
Pasig
Phoenix Philadelphia
Porto Alegre
Québec
Quezon City
Rabat
Rome
Rosario
Rotterdam
Sainshand
San Diego
San Francisco
San Jose
Sao Paulo
Savannah
Scandinavia
Seville
Shanghai
Singapore
Sofia
St. Louis
Stuttgart
The Hague
Tokyo
Ulsan
Vancouver
Warsaw
Xiamen
Yokohama
Figure 5.3 North–South pattern of city-to-city visits
Key: round = North; square = South
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
Size of visitors and hosts
The choice of target cities by size reveals a preference for mid-size cities or smaller
(Table 5.5). The smallest cities in the group tended to visit peers of a similar size,
and as the visitor size grows into the higher range, the choice of host city grows
also, up to cities in the 1 million–5 million category. In other words, bigger cities
get fewer visits, proportionately, even from similar-size “peers.” Altogether, it
seems that visits showed a marked preference for cities in the 1 million–5 million
range. We have no direct information from the survey takers about why this
apparent pattern emerges. Perhaps these medium-size cities, examples of which
Light on a shadow economy 87
Table 5.4 Reformers by North or South
Geographical area
North South
Status Reformer 13 12
Non-reformer 5 18
Pearson coefficient 4.68. Sig = <0.0305
Table 5.5 City visitors and hosts by population size
Population Hosts
range
Visitors Small Medium Large Very Mega- Totals by
(%) (%) (%) large cities visitors
(%) (%)
Small 44 6 33 11 6 18
Medium 5 0 67 24 5 21
Large 14 6 40 29 11 63
Very large 5 5 42 25 22 40
Mega-cities 0 13 52 17 17 23
Total visits 20 10 74 39 22 165
to hosts
Key: small = 50,000–500,000; medium = 500,000–1 million; large = 1 million–5 million; very
large = 5 million–10 million; mega-cities = 10 million and higher. Percentages are rounded up
to whole numbers.
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
Amman
Athens, US
Bangkok
Barcelona
Berlin
Bogota
Brussels Region
Buenos Aires, DF
Cebu City
Charlotte
Colombo
Da Nang
Dakar Region
Hanoi
Honolulu
Hyderabad
Incheon
Istanbul Metro
Kathmandu Kobe
Madrid
Manila City
Mashhad
Melbourne
Mexico Metro
Naga City
Paris Region
Phnom Penh
Portland
Salt Lake City
San Salvador Santa Cruz, BO
Seattle
Seoul Metro
Stockholm
Surabaya
Tabriz
Tehran Toronto
Turin
Ulaanbaatar
Abruzze
Amsterdam Anchorage
Atlanta
Auckland
Beijing
Bilbao
Bologna
Boston
Budapest
Busan
Cambridge
Chicago
Choibalsan
Chongqing
Cleveland
Copenhagen
Curitiba
Darkhan
Denver
Detroit
Edinburgh
Essen
Florence
Florianopolis
Frankfurt
Fredericton
Freiberg
Fukuoka
Geneva
Goteborg
Guangzhou
Hanover
Helsinki
Hong Kong
Hubli Dharward
Indianapolis
Jeju
Johannesburg
Kandahar
Kiev
Kitakyushu
Kochi
Kyoto
Lille
Lima
London
Los Angeles
Lyon
Makati
Malmo
Marikina
Marseille
Mazatlan
Mazovie
Medellín
Miami
Minneapolis
Montevideo
Montréal
Moscow
Munich
Nanjing
New York
Odense
Pasig
Philadelphia
Phoenix
Porto Alegre
Québec
Quezon City
Rabat
Rome
Rosario
Rotterdam
Sainshand
San Diego
San Francisco
San Jose
Sao Paulo Savannah
Stockholm Metro
Seville
Shanghai
Singapore
Sofia
St. Louis
Stuttgart
The Hague
Tokyo
Ulsan
Vancouver
Warsaw
Xiamen
Yokohama
Figure 5.4 Asia-centric pattern of visits
Key: blue = Americas; green = Asia; red = Europe; diamond = reformers
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
Amman
Athens, US
Bangkok
Barcelona
Berlin
Bogota
Brussels Region
Buenos Aires, DF
Charlotte Cebu City
Colombo
Da Nang
Dakar Region
Hanoi
Honolulu
Hyderabad
Incheon
Kathmandu
Kobe
Madrid
Manila City
Mashhad
Melbourne
Mexico Metro
Naga City
Paris Region
Phnom Penh
Portland
Salt Lake City
San Salvador
Santa Cruz, BO
Seattle
Seoul Metro
Stockholm
Surabaya
Tabriz
Tehran
Toronto
Turin
Ulaanbaatar
Abruzze
Amsterdam
Anchorage
Atlanta
Auckland
Beijing
Bilbao
Bologna
Boston
Budapest
Busan
Cambridge
Chicago
Choibalsan Chongqing
Cleveland
Copenhagen
Curitiba
Darkhan
Denver
Detroit
Edinburgh
Essen
Florence
Florianopolis
Frankfurt
Fredericton
Freiberg
Fukuoka
Geneva
Goteborg
Guangzhou
Hanover
Helsinki
Hong Kong
Hubli Dharward
Indianapolis
Jeju
Johannesburg
Kandahar
Kiev
Kochi Kitakyushu
Kyoto
Lille
Lima
London
Los Angeles
Lyon
Makati
Malmo
Marikina
Marseille
Mazatlan
Mazovie
Medellín
Miami
Minneapolis
Montevideo
Montréal
Moscow
Munich
Nanjing
New York
Odense
Pasig
Philadelphia
Phoenix
Porto Alegre
Québec
Quezon City
Rabat
Rome
Rosario
Rotterdam
Sainshand
San Diego
San FranciscoSan Jose
Sao Paulo
Savannah
Stockholm Metro
Seville
Shanghai
Singapore
Sofia
St. Louis
Stuttgart
The Hague
Tokyo
Ulsan
Vancouver
Warsaw
Xiamen
Yokohama
Istanbul Metro
Figure 5.5 Euro-centric pattern of visits
Key: blue = Americas; green = Asia; red = Europe; diamond = reformers
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
include most Scandinavian and Northern European cities (Stockholm, Denmark,
The Hague) as well as Vancouver, represent destinations where it is possible, as
one participant put it, “to get your arms around” the whole thing, i.e., to understand
the detail within the larger setting.
Effort devoted to learning
In an attempt to gauge the importance respondents assign to learning activities,
I asked them to indicate how much time they personally devoted to learning, that
is, to gathering and processing new knowledge in visits, seminars, conferences,
and the like. The responses can be no more than roughly indicative, but they do
show some correlation with whether the city was proactive, and whether it was
a reformer or non-reformer. For the group as a whole, the modal range of time
spent by respondents on learning is between two and three weeks per year (see
Table 5.6).
Non-reformers were even more heavily represented (54 percent) in the two
to three week range. In contrast, nearly 60 percent of respondents from reform
cities were in the above-four-week range, roughly twice the proportion of nonreformers
and equivalent roughly to 8 to 12 percent of the work year.7
As a benchmark, the amount of time devoted to learning in organizations of
OECD countries and US corporations runs in a similar range to the respondents
from reformer cities in the survey. For example, investments in learning at the
national level, admittedly a gross aggregate, is in the 3–6 percent range for OECD
countries (Hwang and Gerami, 2006). A better comparator is a corporate benchmark.
According to O’Leonard, somewhere between 5 percent and 7 percent of
staff time (17 to 25 hours per staff member) was devoted to training in US
90 Framing a view
Table 5.6 Time spent in city learning
Weeks
Respondents None <1 2–3 4–6 >6 Don’t Total
know
(%)
Reformers (22) 4 4 34 29 23 6 100
Proactive (17) 0 6 18 35 35 6 100
Others (31) 6 13 52 6 23 100
Note: figures rounded to the nearest whole digit.
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
corporations in that period (2007 and 2008) (O’Leonard, 2008). The well-known
15 percent rule of Minnesota Mining and Manufacturing (a Fortune 500 company)
states that every employee can use up to 15 percent of his or her time on ideas
not related to daily work and responsibilities (Kanter et al., 1997). With these as
rough guides, it seems that at the very least we can say that representatives of
reformer cities (those who answered the survey) are meeting or exceeding
comparable benchmarks for learning.
Content of learning
To understand what city delegations seek to learn, respondents were also asked
to give open-ended and closed responses to what kinds of topics most matched
their objectives. The 42 cities responding to this question reported 172 learning
exchanges involving 103 cities. The topics linked to these visits covered the gamut,
ranging across topics as varied as bus rapid transit, disaster coordination in connection
with earthquakes, snow-sweeping policies, preservation of open spaces,
practices covering walking and cycling, tourism and cultural policies and downtown
renewal and preservation of heritage areas.
Respondents were also asked to indicate interest in a “closed” (limited) list
of 10 substantive and seven skill or management areas (by “voting” for the top
three). The choices of topics for both substantive and managerial areas were
Light on a shadow economy 91
Table 5.7 Substantive areas of learning
Topic Reformers Proactive Others
(72) reformers (45) (103)
(%)
Urban renewal 12 10 12
Urban planning 15 13 16
Water and waste 7 3 6
Solid waste 10 7 8
Land use and planning 7 3 6
Transport 24 20 19
Climate 10 17 11
HIV 1 0 1
Local economic development 20 13 12
Housing 7 7 7
Other 0 7 4
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
derived from pre-survey interviews with experienced urbanists and managers of
city associations. In the substantive areas (Table 5.7) urban transport was the walkaway
winner, whatever the classification of the city—reformer, proactive or other
(referring to all those not otherwise classified, for example, as reformers only, or
proactive reformers). Local economic development followed as a close second
for reformer groups, and climate change for proactive cities. Recall that the main
difference between “reformers” and “proactive” is that, while both are reformers,
the proactive group visits more and tends to do more codification and processing
of knowledge. Utilities, such as water and electricity, solid waste and topics like
HIV trailed behind for all groups.
On management issues (Table 5.8), each of the three groups of cities expressed
interest in metropolitan governance, ranking it first or second. After that the
groups diverge: proactive cities seek policy analysis; reformers vote for methods
and tools; and the rest of the cities go after financial management, ranking it
above all else. These findings raise interesting questions as to whether proactive
and reforming cities have already achieved some level of comfort in the areas
where the non-reformers (“Others” in Table 5.8) are voting, such as project evaluation.
Further detail on these topics would allow national and international
development assistance organizations to tailor their technical-assistance offerings
better.
A glance at the program content for technical assistance and training offerings
of the World Bank and Asian Development Bank reveals that programmatic
92 Framing a view
Table 5.8 Management areas of learning
Topic Reformers Proactive Others
N = 67 reformers N = 31
N = 53
(%)
Policy analysis 21 19 14
Methods/tools 16 15 12
Project evaluation 11 11 17
Problem solving 10 8 10
Metro governance 19 23 17
Negotiation 9 6 8
Financial management 13 17 18
Other* 1 2 3
* Security, disaster management
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
content is weighted toward topics like financial management, gender, HIV,
corruption, climate change and analytical tools. Relatively little or no attention
is given to formal means of policy analysis. Although a lot of attention is paid to
metro governance, there is little offered by way of normative content.
Modalities of learning
Respondents were asked about the degree of impact of different modalities of
learning, for instance, seminars, private sector sources, university courses, activities
of associations and city-to-city exchanges (see list in Table 5.9). City-to-city
exchanges were ranked by all respondents as having the most impact, followed
by professional associations, organizations and in-house seminars. Except for
surveys and on-the-job training, the “other” categories in written comments
turned out largely to replicate the categories already mentioned (city to city,
professional groups and associations) and do not change the outcome.
The high marks given by all groups for city-to-city exchanges fit with the
pattern of high numbers of city visits that we saw at the beginning of this chapter.
Cities meet high costs of travel to get the goods despite the risks of political heat
back home. These results beg the question—one that needs to be pondered by
the helping institutions and national policy—about the factors that produce
impact and alternative ways to get the same bang for buck. On the other end of
the spectrum, universities, professional reports and consultant firms came out at
the bottom in terms of impact. Is there room for new or improved players in this
drama?
Light on a shadow economy 93
Table 5.9 Impact of learning events (average impact rating in range of none (1) to very high (5))
Modality Reformers Proactive Others
(22) (17) (31)
In-house seminars 3.31 3.6 3.45
Consultant firms 3.47 3.59 3.00
University courses 3.08 4.15 3.27
Prof. publications/reports 3.15 3.47 3.40
C2C exchanges 4.38 4.38 4.29
Assns/city orgs 3.63 3.94 3.90
Prof. organizations 3.27 3.94 3.53
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
Summing up and looking ahead
The survey data suggest that a large volume of exchange has been taking place
in cities of significant size, that cities prefer to learn from each other, and that
they are aware of sources of further information they would like to explore. Above
all, our proactive reformers appear to engage in more or less the same proportion
of city-to-city learning as reformers, but the proactive group is distinct in its
dedication of time and effort in gathering knowledge and processing it, through
both documents and discussion. Though imprecise, our measure shows that the
respondents in the survey, at least, dedicate an amount of time comparable to
or even exceeding corporate benchmarks of investment in knowledge.
All cities appear to be looking for knowledge on transport and metropolitan
management, the two most widely cited issues, but many more are on the list of
concerns. Further work will help to understand how cities choose their “targets”
for learning about these topics and to establish a stronger connection between
learning—i.e., the number and kinds of events—with the size, wealth and other
policy variables in cities that might affect the motivation for and processing of
city learning.
Learning as building blocks to an innovative milieu?
Survey data have shown that self-declared reformer cities take steps to institutionalize
the learning process. They codify knowledge, conduct follow-up, monitor
new ideas, organize internal learning events, and store knowledge in document
form. The main point is that key features in proactive cities are beginning to
take shape. They could well be interpreted as building blocks in the innovative
milieu, that soft infrastructure discussed so widely in the literature in connection
with creative and knowledge economies.
These findings line up with research on twinning. De Villiers found in a survey
of 171 city-twinning projects that strategies, experience and level of resources
made no difference in outcomes of adopting change. Rather, a written plan, community
awareness, managerial commitment and personalities were the difference
makers. Active marketing also correlated with community commitment and public
understanding of the city-to-city engagements (de Villiers, 2007). Similarly, van
Lindert and Bontenbal document individual and collective cases showing a variety
of outcomes and commonly found issues, such as ownership, control over content,
financing, and depth of participation (Bontenbal, 2009; Bontenbal and van
Lindert, 2009).
94 Framing a view
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
Exchange in the shadows
The term “shadow” has been used in the chapter title to reflect the largely hidden
exchange of knowledge taking place around the world. For the most part, this
activity is outside the policy awareness of cities and states. More importantly,
cities typically have to fight a battle against accusations from local political
opposition and national figures, who see only junkets in these exchanges. Even
the international development-assistance agencies are not convinced that cityto-
city visits are worth the high cost they entail. And the academic community,
though exploring such ideas as city networks, the transfer and use of knowledge
in knowledge economies, and the uptake of policy and practice from one city to
another (in policy migration), has not produced an approach to gauge the payoff
of city visits. It would be useful to have metrics of this kind. At least then a
basis for policy could be grounded in empirical estimates of cost and benefit. As
it stands, cities operate in the shadows, often not trumpeting their efforts until
and unless a pay-off can be demonstrated.
Cities meet the high costs of knowledge for good reasons. City leaders search
outward for ideas because they have short terms of office and they know that
learning from others is cheaper and less risky than pursuing untested ideas and
ending up in false starts. Conversely, many mayors I have spoken with confess a
suspicion about the agendas in the back of the minds of World Bank experts
who visit them in connection with policy reforms linked to lending or other forms
of financial assistance. Mayors understand that an agenda of policy reforms can
often be a direct threat to one’s hold on political power. Mayors are even more
suspicious of the hidden and not-so-hidden motives of private businesses who
offer products or services touted to be cutting edge or state of the art.
Talking across the table directly to another mayor who has no policy agenda
or product to sell puts the conversation immediately on a different, more equal
footing. Cities share a world-view and understand the amalgam of political
conditions that typically face local governments. Mayors and their policy and technical
people are in the business of making political calculations about risk reward.
Getting high-quality information that addresses these risks at the same time as
new and best practice is being transmitted offers a double pay-off.
These perspectives are corroborated by many anecdotal sources of information,
and they hold important clues to improving the process and the yield of
city-to-city visits.
Light on a shadow economy 95
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
What’s next?
We turn now to explore specific cases in depth. Our aim is to gain further insight
into the DNA of learning by diving more deeply into three styles of proactive
learners. We shall see that important mechanisms of the learning process are
the same as those in innovation, and that these mechanisms lie at the heart of
the urban ba.
Notes
1 I am grateful for the assistance of David Leipziger in the management and analysis of
survey data.
2 The survey was implemented in two waves: the first in the fall of 2008, which returned
27 responses; and a follow-up with slight modifications in the fall of 2009, with 29
additional responses. Three responses were discarded for various reasons (redundancy,
incomplete information). Each version was posted on SurveyMonkey on the web, with
Spanish and Portuguese versions available. Except where indicated, the data reported
here reflect combined responses to identical questions.
3 This number assumes seven-person teams staying four nights; around $800 per capita
plus $1500 in airfares.
4 Cities that document their findings and organize their own sessions at home are significantly
related (chi^2 = 6.84, df = 4, p = 0.002; kendall tau b = -0.488, approx Tb =
–5.07, p < 0.001).
5 Significant at 0.038 and 0.027 levels, respectively.
6 By “soft” storage, I mean to refer to informal networks of the urban community
(Campbell, 2009). Soft storage is tantamount to tacit knowledge, as described by Nonaka
and colleagues (Nonaka et al., 2000).
7 Though customs vary from country to country, the number of working weeks in a
calendar year is assumed to be 46, allowing for holidays and vacation time.
References
Bontenbal, M. (2009). Cities as partners. The challenge to strengthen urban governance
through North–South city partnerships, Eburon, Delft.
Bontenbal, M. and P. van Lindert (2009). “Transnational city-to-city cooperation: issues
arising from theory and practice,” Habitat International, 33, pp. 131–133.
Campbell, T. (2009). Torino as a learning city, The German Marshall Fund of the United
States, Washington, DC.
de Villiers, J. C. (2007). “Towards an understanding of the success factors in international
96 Framing a view
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
twinning and sister-city relationships,” South African Journal of Business Management,
38, pp. 1–10.
Hwang, J. and M. Gerami (2006). “Analysis of investment in knowledge inside OECD
countries,” International Journal of Social Sciences, 1, pp. 99–104.
Kanter, R., J. Kao and F. Wiersema (1997). Innovation: breakthrough thinking at 3M, DuPont,
GE, Pfizer, and Rubbermaid, HarperBusiness, London.
Nonaka, I., R. Toyama and N. Konno (2000). “SECI, ba and leadership: a unified model of
dynamic knowledge creation,” Long Range Planning, 33, pp. 5–34.
O’Leonard, K. (2008). The corporate learning factbook. benchmarks, facts, and analysis in
US corporate learning and development, Bersin and Associates, San Francisco.
Light on a shadow economy 97
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
Part III
Crucibles of learning:
proactive learner-reformers
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
6 Informal learners–Turin, Portland and
Charlotte1
The gamut of learning styles explored in the previous chapters suggests that cities
go about their business of learning in very different ways. Even the most assiduous
among them, those proactive learners, have built up city learning capacity using
different styles. And though style is undoubtedly a result of social, cultural and
historical circumstances that shape the ways cities do business, different learning
styles nevertheless have important features in common.
Three typical styles of proactive reformers are represented in this and the
following two chapters. For the most part, the stories demonstrate that cities
acquire and process new ideas in a more or less systematic way, despite their
widely differing organizational arrangements. They construct the basic machinery
needed to gather new ideas, to evaluate them for use locally, and then apply
them with appropriate and sometimes novel adjustments. These last steps lie at
the heart of innovation.
The three styles presented are called simply: (1) informal; (2) technical; and
(3) corporate. In preparing this book, I have personally observed the organizational
arrangements cities have set up to manage learning. This present chapter
will explore the cases of Turin, Italy and Portland, Oregon as informal learners.2
Others that can be placed in this category include Barcelona, Cape Town and
Charlotte, and examples will be brought into the discussion where appropriate.
Successive chapters will explore technical and corporate cases.
The case of Turin
Turin has achieved a wholesale turnaround without adopting an official position
on learning, knowledge acquisition, knowledge intensiveness or even a lead
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
agency. The term “informal” is meant to denote that no formal organization is
erected and no written game rules govern the practice of learning as was done
with Metropoli-30 in Bilbao or the promotion apparatus in Tampere, Finland.
Further, the purposes, mission and outcomes evolved over time and were not prescribed
in any formal way—i.e., put in writing and adopted or explicitly acknowledged
by the city or stakeholders in civic, commercial and academic circles.
The story of Turin will show that the city has put in place informal arrangements
that resemble the “soft” infrastructure that Aydalot called innovative milieu,
an atmosphere of trust, collaboration and creativity in a locality or region (Aydalot,
1986; Camagni, 1991, 1995). At the heart of the matter for Turin are network
mechanisms of public, private and civic leaders who were assembled for planning
purposes and who then continued to operate in a consultative way, building on
trust that was created in the early stages of the planning process.
This network machinery became a critical tool to gauge ideas, inform policy,
and facilitate management, particularly during the strategic planning for the
city and later for the 2006 Winter Olympic Games. These planning exercises took
place during the mayoral administrations of Valentino Castellani (1993–2000) and
Sergio Chiamparino (2001–2010). Let’s look first at the context of learning and
then turn to the modalities of how things were learned.
The setting—reform and decentralization
Like many cities successful in learning and reform, Turin’s story begins with a
political and financial crisis in the late 1980s and early 1990s. Turin’s history is
intimately tied to Fiat motors. Founded in 1908, the very name—Fabbrica Italiana
Automobili Torino—reflects the tight relationship between the company and
the city. For more than half a century, Fiat was the main economic stalwart on
which the city was strongly dependent. In the 1970s and 1980s, the company
was plunged into a crisis of poor management and falling demand, which cost
tens of thousands of jobs. This catastrophe was exacerbated by a political crisis,
a failure of morality in politics in Turin that turned it into a bastion of corruption
so pervasive that the city came to be known as “tangentopolis” (roughly “payoff
city”). National political reforms at the beginning of the 1990s led to the direct
election of Mayor Valentino Castellani.
The new mayor, formerly a professor of engineering at Turin’s prestigious
Politecnico, campaigned both to diversify the economic base of the city and to
reform its political process. Upon winning, as described in greater detail later,
he immediately launched a process of fact finding together with an open and
active deliberation involving hundreds of citizens and thousands more taking part
102 Crucibles of learning
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
in a more passive way, attending presentations made for a wider public about
how the economy, the city’s infrastructure base and other neglected needs could
be addressed.
An overview of lessons learned in Turin: the substance
of what and the style of how
To keep our discussion manageable, we shall focus on new ideas and knowledge
related to planning in Turin, particularly certain aspects of strategic planning in
the late 1990s and early 2000s. The content of Turin’s learning can be characterized
both as substantive—lessons about “what” to do—as well as stylistic—
lessons about “how” to do it. Let’s take the concrete substantive lessons first.
For starters, the city discovered the meaning of strategic planning, as opposed
to master planning, which had been the sole requirement of long-time practice
in Italian cities before 1993. Much effort was exerted by the city, driven largely
by Castellani himself, to explore the terrain of a strategic approach to the future.
Not even Castellani was fully aware of the differences between strategic versus
structure or land use planning when he took office. His first exposure to strategic
views came in Barcelona a decade earlier. On one of several visits there, Castellani
met with city leaders and planners who had begun to think about an approach
which links long-term change in economic, political, and social factors with not
just the shape and equipment of the city but the very identity as well.
As we shall see in more detail later, Castellani and his team arranged to disseminate
the lessons and the promise of strategic planning not only to key
stakeholders in Turin, but through all of Italy. When he took office, the idea of
planning was deeply rooted in the fortunes of Fiat and the physical parameters
of planning inherited from the previous 50 years. Turin had followed national
law, and more importantly, the exigencies of Fiat, for key directions in planning,
for instance, in the provision of infrastructure like streets and utilities to serve
the residential areas populated by the Fiat labor force. Castellani sensed, and later
convinced planning elites, that, like many other European cities, Turin needed
longer-range planning to go hand in hand with the changing form and economic
fortunes of Europe.
In contrast to structure plans, which seek to lay out rational grids and meet
growing needs in infrastructure and facilities, strategic visions have an eye outward,
on how the city is to make its living, how it fits into a larger assemblage
of city-regions in Europe. Strategic planning considers competition from other
cities and looks toward comparative advantages in image and identity, as well
as more typical issues of completed grid works for inner-city circulation.
Informal learners 103
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
European practices in planning, regional development, economic change and
other reforms were already taking shape to complement the physical and
knowledge-intensive planning in Turin. Castellani and his planning lieutenants
observed that a key insight was the realization that “things can be done” and
that cities (and mayors) “are not alone.” By this, Castellani was referring to a
slowly emerging alteration in the proportions of power with decentralization in
Italy and elsewhere in Europe. These shifts in power led to new opportunities for
cities to initiate actions. Besides the transformation in Barcelona after the death
of Franco, Castellani witnessed Lyon engaging in new challenges, like economic
development and social progress. Several interviewees spoke of the psychological
value of seeing that “others have done it,” referring often to Glasgow, but also
to Barcelona, particularly in connection with the Olympic Games.
One of the first examples of learning was about connectivity. City leaders
discovered that the longer-term view of strategic planning needed to be geared
to the city’s economic fortunes by means of inter-city linkages—especially highspeed
rail—as well as to intra-city connectivity, road, rail and forms of land use.
Direct exposure of the city’s leadership to progressive cities in Europe like
Barcelona, Glasgow and Lyon, as well as to committee work on regionalism in the
European Union, made it clear that the city needed to be unencumbered from
the rail lines that had served Fiat well earlier in the century, but had become an
insurmountable barrier that divided the city sharply as Turin grew. The rationale
for gearing the city’s physical infrastructure to its changing economic structure
soon came to suit Fiat as well during its recovery.
Europe was growing more tightly connected as prospects for high-speed rail
grew closer to reality, leading to tighter inter-regional connections toward the
east and south to Milan and Genoa on the one hand, and on the other, toward
the west into Spain and France, particularly Lyon and Barcelona. This implied a
greater understanding of regional markets and trade and strategic alliances in
knowledge-intensive industries. Also, Turin was getting acquainted with global
standards in connection with the 2006 Winter Olympic Games, for which high
international levels of quality—in hotel and food services, for instance—needed
to be met and monitored.
In addition to a new approach to planning, the city learned about knowledge
intensiveness. With the beginning of Sergio Chiamparino’s administration, a
second strategic plan was organized to build on the preceding one by enhancing
the city’s knowledge-related institutions, like universities, libraries and museums.
This software side of Turin was to complement the strategic deployment of “hard”
infrastructure planned and started under Castellani’s administration. Both hard
and soft investments were being implemented as Turin was preparing to stage
the 2006 Winter Olympic Games.
104 Crucibles of learning
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
The shift to a focus on building a knowledge economy under Chiamparino’s
administration raised many questions of institutional standards and practice.
In the first place, the concept of knowledge economies was beginning to take
hold throughout Europe in the 1990s. One consequence was that new standards
needed to be observed in the competitive allocation of resources in university
departments, research programs and private sector proposals for public sector
procurement, practices that took on special relevance in connection with the
competitive process for accessing EU research and cohesiveness funds.
Stylistically, the accomplishment of the Games taught Turin that it could meet
world-class deadlines, a lesson that could only have come with a commitment to
undertake a world-class event. One of the most enduring stylistic lessons was the
public–private way of doing business. Many interviewees spoke of the mutual
distrust that once characterized relations between the public and private realms
in Turin. Spirited and often ideological discord divided public–private relations
in the early 1990s. A bitter legacy of the decades-long struggles between labor
unions and management at Fiat had shaped the very identities of these institutions
and engendered deep mistrust and ill-feeling.
The strategic planning processes and the Olympic Games created a highpressure
cauldron for more collaborative working arrangements. These circumstances
seemed to dissolve some of the mistrust of the past. By the time
Chiamparino was completing his first term, attitudes appeared to have changed
fundamentally. Many interviewees spoke of this transformation. For example,
one participant contrasted the acrimony and mistrust of the past with the presentday
situation. In the words of one member of the chamber of commerce, “Today,
not even a small proposal would be presented without an open and deliberate
round of consultations between the private sector and the public sector—
including commune, province, and region.” Several observers stated that the new
working style is a matter of “mutual respect.” This stylistic change was a milestone
in the city’s learning process and set the stage for a new phase of learning.
To sum up, Turin’s exposure to external knowledge came from: (1) other cities;
(2) methods and practices in the EU; (3) global practice through industries in a
growing knowledge economy; (4) global practice assimilated through the
successful bid for and hosting of the Winter Olympics in 2006; (5) the international
business practice of Fiat. The internal mechanism is the network of connections
between and among players taking part in one or more of the previous five
realms.
Informal learners 105
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
Turin’s learning apparatus
Up to now, the reader might be tempted to conclude that strong mayoral leadership
was the main factor in Turin’s learning. In fact, leadership was important,
but not the most important factor. Two successive mayors locked onto an
approach to the city’s future, but both administrations needed many dedicated
participants from key segments in the city to bring a new future into reality.
Dozens of public, private and civic actors peopled the machinery of learning in
Turin.
Before turning to explore the actors that took part in planning, we should
take note of Turin’s formalized institutions that nominally would be responsible
for strategy and planning. Four are worth noting here. First is the city’s
Department of External Affairs, a typical municipal arrangement to handle
external relationships, including inbound and outbound missions, and to plan
and keep track of official visits, including those of the mayor and members of
industry. A second is a special agency, Torino Internazionale, set up specifically
to implement the strategic plans. It is perhaps uniquely suited to developing and
managing a learning process. Third is the Politecnico (the Polytechnic University),
whose Rector, Francesco Profumo, quietly conducted a long-term campaign to
expand the capacity and physical plant of the university, to integrate it with the
city in order to enable the university to compete on a global basis. It was his vision,
and no doubt his influence, that geared the second strategic plan to knowledge
intensiveness. A fourth group is several agencies (one succeeding the other) whose
main mandate is the economic and social development of the Piedmont region.
Closely allied but with a broader and more purely industrial and commercial
outlook is the Chamber of Commerce.
Organizations of these types—city-based, plan-based, a university, regional
authorities and commercial interests—are found in many cities. Often they
are very effective in accomplishing their goals. But none of the four in Turin is
specifically tasked to gather new knowledge, keep Turin up to speed on urban
developments and best practice, to conduct research, and develop ideas a city
may need to remain competitive. Instead, these tasks were carried out by ad hoc,
informal groups drawn from all of these and many other organizations, businesses
and NGOs, working hand in hand, step by step, as needs required.
Exposure to outside influences
The preceding section on lessons shows how important were Turin’s connections
to sources of new ideas in Europe. In particular, Turin made specific and well-
106 Crucibles of learning
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
targeted connections to key cities undergoing strategic planning and used these
connections to help guide its own work. As mentioned earlier, guest presentations
were made by visiting delegations from European cities during each of two
strategic plans. During the first, when the idea of a strategic plan was novel in
Turin, five cities (Barcelona, Bilbao, Glasgow, Lyon and Stockholm) were invited
to present their experience. The audience included Turin’s political leadership
and technical professionals, as well as the broader public.
Sine then, delegations from Turin have averaged more than 30 visits per year
to other cities, mostly in Europe but also to Seoul, Korea, where metropolitan
planning arrangements is a key area of interest. Urban renewal has continued
to be a theme of interest. Climate change has grown in importance, as have
metropolitan governance, project evaluation and negotiation skills.
For many years, Barcelona was an important source of knowledge. During
both the first and second of Turin’s strategic plans, it benefited from Barcelona’s
experience in developing an overall scope of strategic planning, as well as in the
mechanics and process of putting a plan together. Mayor Castellani’s time in
Barcelona in the 1980s, and later in the 1990s, led to the appointment of a former
mayor of Barcelona, Pasqual Maragall, to be head of Turin’s Scientific Committee,
a group of advisors for the first strategic plan. Additionally, one of Maragall’s
deputies made repeated visits to Turin and, according to one former deputy mayor
of Turin, “tutored the city” in the methodology of strategic planning. Turin was
the first Italian city to adopt and publish a strategic plan and subsequently became
a founding member of the Italian Network of Strategic Cities.3
Other figures in Turin gathered ideas and contacts in Europe. Mercedes Bresso
served on the EU Committee of the Regions and was in a position to observe a
wide variety of practices and opportunities being afforded cities and regions by
the EU. Castellani also sat on the the Committee of the Regions. This and the
contact with other cities enabled Turin’s leaders to see how other cities set
objectives, and in Castellani’s words, “how cities developed methods” to solve
their problems.
In succeeding years, when a second, knowledge-intensive strategic plan and
preparations for the Olympic Games were under way, similar references were
made to European counterparts where knowledge economies were being built
and, as in the case of Barcelona, where Olympic Games had been hosted.
Turin also drew on ties with EUROCITIES and on relationships with such associations
as the French NGO Quartiers en Crise (Neighborhoods in Crisis). With the
help of local firms, this last contact was essential to framing an approach to social
issues dealing with poverty on the periphery of Turin during the first strategic
plan.
Informal learners 107
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
Internal networks
Though a large volume of ideas was gathered from outside Turin, much was also
generated internally. More important, all the learning, the acquiring, processing
and validating of new information, was undertaken by a group of civic leaders,
working not as a formally instituted agency but rather more like an informal
posse. Much has been said in previous chapters about soft infrastructure in
cities, and Turin is a good illustration of how that milieu develops. Recall how
Seattle’s study-mission members aim to “get to know” each other. They are
participating in breaking down the redoubts of uncertainty and mistrust that
obstruct cooperative behaviors. Turin is a case where special relationships and
trust were developed from scratch. We can learn a lot from Turin about how this
process works.
A key step in the formation of Turin’s milieu was Mayor Castellani’s conviction
that a new start was needed following the moral and political meltdown of Turin
in the decades preceding his election. An officer at one of Turin’s main foundations
put it terms of having “to shuffle the deck” to bring in new people and
open up the system. From the very beginning, Turin’s planning elites were opened
to the intermingling of fresh blood with the old guard. The process wasn’t accidental;
it was a deliberate strategy.
Even before taking office, Mayor Elect Castellani viewed the population of
Turin as somewhat “in a shell” and recognized that the multiple crises of preceding
decades required the laying of fresh foundations in Turin’s public choicemaking
mechanisms. The Mayor deliberately created a development forum to
open up the process. Specific groups were engaged in hearing outside speakers,
a dozen commissions of 15 to 20 persons each were formed to think through
specific ideas on an informal basis. Each group set its own agenda and constituted
its membership, pulling people in as and when needed.
One high-level official in Castellani’s administrations cited the “Friday tea with
the Mayor” as an illustration of the openness of the process. Groups of people
(altogether perhaps 150 people, according to one of Castellani’s deputies at the
time), including members from the opposition parties, were invited and mixed
in small Friday sessions to discuss in complete freedom a “soft agenda” with “open
minds.” The official observes that “the strategic plan was an instrument to create
networks . . . to put networks together.”
The Rector of the Politecnico is a good example of an agent of external and
internal knowledge who moved with impact through the informal networks
in Turin during and after the strategic planning. Before assuming the position
of rector, Profumo had traveled widely, spending up to a year in each of Japan,
the US and Eastern Europe, each time interspersed with a return stay in Turin.
108 Crucibles of learning
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
A common thread linked the stops in his academic migration. He was observing
the relationship—physical, academic and financial—between universities and the
mother cities he visited.
His vision of strong civic–academic integration was put to the test in 2002,
when a Vice President of General Motors visited Mayor Chiamparino to explore
major investments that would create a research center in the city linked to GM’s
partnership with Fiat. One of the key issues was public administration: could GM
count on the city to meet its side of the bargain for facilities and other arrangements?
More particularly, could the city commit a champion to drive the process?
On the spot, with GM officials still in his office, the Mayor phoned Profumo and
gave him a three-minute summary. The parties met at eight the next morning,
framed a memorandum of understanding, and within three months of signing
had 220 GM researchers installed at the Politecnico. That beginning led to a much
expanded physical campus that today forms a significant part of Turin’s revitalization.
The deal moved quickly because the groundwork had been started a halfdozen
years earlier with Profumo’s self-organized study tour and his active and
trusted participation in the strategic planning process. His image of city–university
arrangements, and above all his personal style—trusted, competent, in charge
of his domain—had laid the groundwork for the deal.
My interviews in Turin uncovered a system of trusted ties between and among
key players who were engaged in the planning process (see Appendix 3 for more
detail about the interview process). In interviews, I asked each informant to name
persons he or she regarded as: (1) trustworthy; and (2) active in the community
like himself or herself. These last questions were crucial to understanding linkages
of trust. In Table 6.1, “sources” refers to the interviewees; “references” refer to
those persons named by interviewees as persons of trust. Table 6.2 tabulates the
frequencies with which a given person was named.
Informal learners 109
Table 6.1 Sources, by sector
Sector Sources interviewed References made, by sector
Public 6 31
Private 6 40
Civic 1 4
University 2 19
Foundation 2 6
Unknown 0 4
Total 17 104
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
A total of 104 unique individuals were named as trusted ties; seven persons
were named more than once, and six were named more than three times. Several
persons were named eight times. These individuals form the nodes in the resulting
network of ties shown in Figure 6.1. Grouped and presented as a single picture,
these data give us what I call a cloud of trust, a constellation of network ties
between persons where trust is indicated by the direction of arrows from the
source.
In Figure 6.1, interviewees are represented as circles, trusted ties as squares.
The overall structure of the network shows rather tight clusters, and that several
interviewees function as bridges, connecting separate clusters (left center and
lower left). This picture is somewhat akin to the pattern found in a study by
Belligni and his team at the University of Turin (Belligni et al., 2008). At the same
time, the figure shows a central cluster of nodes, persons named by multiple
interviewees (as reflected in Table 6.2).
What about the relationships among the interviewees themselves, a group
we might think of as elites? Do they have many common ties, revealing a cohesive
structure? Standard measures (density 0.23, compactness 0.92) mean that nearly
a quarter of all possible connections is present in the network, but that the
“distance” between any two persons in the network is just a bit more (1.17) than
only one link away. High cohesiveness of this kind is normally interpreted as
meaning that actors are able to respond quickly and effectively to stimuli. Again,
a few persons are key nodes in the network. Overall, this tightness may be one
of the factors thought to be important in the magic sauce that plays a role in
Turin’s innovation, responsiveness and competitiveness.
Another key finding uncovered in the interviews but reflected only weakly in
the data is that new members were imported into networks during the planning
process. According to participants involved, this new mixing was both unexpected
110 Crucibles of learning
Table 6.2 Frequencies of persons named
No. times named No. persons
1 97
2 12
3 5
4 5
5 1
6 2
7 2
8 2
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
and unprecedented. Two distinct episodes of opening took place; one in the first
strategic plan in the mid-1990s, and a second during the second strategic plan in
the early 2000s. Particularly in the first strategic plan, persons whose skills and
creativity had not been previously tapped were brought into deliberations without
regard to political affiliation, family background or industrial sector.
Several interviewees explained that they had not anticipated nor could they
have expected to be a part of the deliberative efforts in city planning. For instance,
interviewees told of having been invited to take part in meetings and discussions
Informal learners 111
Figure 6.1 Interviewees and trusted relationships in Turin
Key: red circles = interviewees; blue squares = trusted others
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
around strategic planning without having a family, industrial, or social “patron.”
They described having received calls “out of the blue” by persons whose names
they recognized by position or title, but with whom they had no previous relationship.
Age differences are a partial reflection of this mixing, as suggested in Table
6.3. Many of the newly invited individuals were separated in age by a decade or
more from most of their “peers” at the meetings they were invited to attend.
The network data related to age appear to corroborate these anecdotal stories.
The “Name” column in Table 6.3 shows a mild bimodal distribution with soft
peaks of age in the 60s and 40s.
The work of Belligni and his colleagues is confined to the period 2001–2006
and focuses on somewhat static “milieus”—i.e., sub-networks in Belligni’s
nomenclature—each of which has distinct characteristics in terms of religious,
political or business affiliations, as well as in terms of composition and interconnectedness.
The present analysis suggests a dynamic quality in the functioning
of the networks in Turin, as newcomers crossed over socio-economic lines.
Some interviewees reflecting on the process found it entirely innovative, and
in several cases persons making these “crossovers” progressed to new and important
institutional positions. These findings add a new dimension to recent works
on governance networks in Turin by Belligni. The significance of this finding is
that mobilizing new generations of activists might offer lessons to other cities
seeking to build new cadres of leadership.
112 Crucibles of learning
Table 6.3 Age distribution
Age Source Name
0* 0 6
70 2 7
60 3 32
50 6 24
40 4 28
30 2 6
20 0 1
Total 17 104
* Unknown or deceased
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
Portland
If youth is a question for the future of Turin, it is a recurring theme in Portland.
Identified by Richard Florida (2002) as one of those tolerant places with
technology and talent, Portland’s flourishing growth has been built on a strong
ethos of environmental balance, informal living, and, in the words of several
residents interviewed for this book, “a city of small things.”
The environmental character of Portland was also important to its founding.
Portland is an immigrant town, like many on the West Coast of the US, settled
less than two centuries ago by enterprising farmers, timber men and traders who
depended on natural resources and external trade to make a living.
A mass of vertical green surrounds the city, topped off by Mount Hood, perhaps
the most visible of icons associated with Portland. The nearness to outdoors
has appealed to many generations of newcomers over the years. The natural
setting is, in the words of a local architect, “like living in a bowl.” Portlanders
are in touch with the green and according to many that I spoke with are “not all
that driven by the global forces,” the city being “somewhat internal, cautious,
but innovative in its own way, taking things in small steps.”
Openness to newcomers was a long-standing feature of West Coast cities and
is still evidenced by the high rate of immigration of educated young in the 25–35
age range (Cortright and Colleta, 2005). Turin and Barcelona, by contrast, contend
with linguistic and more conservative social structures that impede the integration
of outsiders. Portland appears to have adapted continuously to current mores
and cultural preferences, as shown by the priority attached to nature, the outdoors,
biking and informal working, brought with immigration of the young
and college-educated talent.
The “big bang” in Portland: urban growth boundary
It wasn’t always small steps for Portland. In the early 1970s, the combination of
a visionary governor (McCall) and mayor (Goldschmidt) captured a deep-seated
sentiment about a homegrown issue: preserving farmland in the Willamette
Valley surrounding the city. The environmental movement was beginning to
gather momentum in the US. It helped boost the passage of the land use control
act by the state legislature in 1973, which obliged cities in Oregon to prepare
and adopt land use plans and an urban growth boundary. The law became a
milestone in urban development for cities in the US.
Support for land planning also came from neighborhood associations, which
had been fostered in the late 1960s by a neighborhood association ordinance.
Informal learners 113
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
That opened a channel for the voices of local interests, and a chorus of support
was heard in high volume over land and planning issues. The volume was turned
up when local planners began to re-think the idea of downtown freeways snaking
into the city, a strategy that began with a proposal by New York’s Robert Moses
to link Portland to a freeway master plan for the state. With community support,
planners deliberately failed to authorize investment in the Mt Hood freeway. The
freeway alignment would have run along the parkway that currently forms a
green seam in the heart of the city along the Willamette River. Instead of the Mt
Hood freeway, the city used federal funds to build its first five-mile stretch of light
rail. As we shall see shortly, that system, complemented by streetcars, bike lanes,
parks and trails, benefited from lessons imported from European cities and
elsewhere.
These major departures—an urban boundary and a foiling of freeways—
served to protect exurban farmland and inner-urban character. Eschewing the
conventional wisdom of freeways triggered a search process to attract new ideas
from many other cities.
Portland’s learning mechanisms
Like Turin and other cities examined in detail, Portland has at least three classes
of learning mechanisms. First is organized exchange with outside sources of information,
mainly from other cities. External sources include cities in Europe as well
as in the US. A second source is talent and ideas that come into the city with young
immigrants seeking the blend of urbanism and nature that Portland has been
creating. A third mechanism is a system of internal networks of trust formed by
mainstream civic-minded persons who care about the city and devote professional
and personal time to community deliberation, discussion and planning.
Exposure to outside influences
Portland has actively sought out ideas on land use, biking, transportation, local
economic development, streetcars, metropolitan and regional growth, and urban
redevelopment and park systems, among other topics.
The big bang of growth boundary and land planning had multiple spin-offs
in land use and transport planning. Developments in these fields were peppered
with international visits. Outbound missions for learning have been undertaken
since the early 1980s as an Ambassadors Program, organized by business and
commercial groups, most notably the Portland Development Commission and currently
under the auspices of Greenlight Greater Portland, a business promotion
114 Crucibles of learning
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
organization. Also, the Chamber of Commerce, the Metro Council (an elected
regional government and the German Marshall Fund (GMF) all sponsored visits
to other cities.
Visits to Amsterdam and Stockholm organized by the GMF and Metro Council
in the 1990s were decisive in demonstrating to the delegation from Portland
that, in the words of one participant, “bike and walking paths needed to go
somewhere,” meaning that they needed to be meaningful destinations and be
integrated with the larger transit system. Backyard bike lanes in Swedish cities
showed the extent to which biking could be inserted into the interstices of
neighborhoods.
Similarly, Amsterdam’s biking rules of the road—together with “green boxes”
and parking corrals for bikes—provided insight into measures of security that
helped to address reticence among the wider public about the safety of biking
in heavy auto traffic. Above all, Portlanders learned the extent to which leading
cities in Europe integrated biking and walking into an entire system of neighborhoods,
linked to schools, health centers, shopping, places of work and open space.
Many other ideas were harvested from visits to Italy (flexible production for
growing high-tech firms in Portland), Copenhagen (templates for local economic
development) and Prague (streetcar system and production of rolling stock).
Chicago and Salt Lake provided ideas about mixed land uses, open space and
parks. Vancouver offered insights about the feasibility of re-densification with
mixed-use housing inside the city core. Utah and other regions in the US attracted
Portland’s leadership to regional approaches to planning, an idea that is both
alive and in long-term practice with Portland’s Metro Council, the only elected
metropolitan authority in the US with land use regulatory power.
Informal learners 115
Box 6.1 Green boxes and bike corrals
European cities provided many ideas that fit the moment for the rapidly
growing biking culture in Portland. Two such examples are “green boxes”
and “bike corrals.” Green boxes are large rectangles outlined in green paint
on certain city streets. The boxes form a safety zone for bikes at stoplights.
The idea for green boxes struck an immediate chord with Portlanders who
had begun to encounter accidents involving bikes and cars, their operators
being insufficiently accustomed to each other’s presence on city streets. Bike
corrals were a similar idea—to create a parking area safe for bikes, riders,
pedestrians and motorists.
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
All these fed into an ongoing transformation of the customary planning and
transit nexus in the US, producing an entirely new phenotype in US urbanism.
The result is a downscaling of district-grain densities, such as the “one-minute
neighborhood,” and more emphasis on walking, biking, streetcar and light rail.
These ideas were discussed and refined after much processing in the form of
discussion, community meetings, and presentations by thinkers such as Peter
Calthorp, the renowned Portland-based architect; Robert Yaro from the New York
Regional Plan Association; Elizabeth Deakin of Embarq (a transit-focused NGO);
and others seeking to make meaning out of “compact growth.”
Ideas imported with immigrants
Portland has ranked consistently high in the share of college graduates who settle
in the city. Portland had the fifth-fastest rate of growth of 25–34-year-old college
graduates in the US in the early 2000s. Several interviewees who fit this profile
spoke of being “able to do things here,” that “you get noticed,” “you get heard,”
and “it’s not done yet,” referring to the opportunity to strike out in new directions
and to launch new ideas. The clearest example of this mode of learning is the
biking culture.
Beginning with the environmental movement in the 1970s, young people
settling in Portland brought environmental and green values, including their
bicycles. The biking culture fitted well into the matrix of many small-scale, flat
neighborhoods and leafy streets. The accretion of bikers included bloggers, such
as Jonathan Maus, an immigrant from Southern California and creator and developer
of bikeportland.org. BikePortland.org has a national and international
readership, and has been involved in many local battles between bikers and the
still predominant two-ton motor vehicles.
But Maus didn’t just walk into a ready-made biking culture. His blog, now
one of the most widely read bike blogs in the US, was started to help pull together
the various disorganized strands of interests he found soon after his arrival in
Oregon. In some ways, his success exceeds Portland’s achievements. Maus will
tell you, as he did me, that the system of infrastructure for biking is far from
complete. Yet his story, as an immigrant with an idea, illustrates the learning
mechanisms in Portland.
Originally from Orange County and later Santa Barbara in California, Maus
found the home he could afford in Portland and a biking environment to his
liking. With experience in journalism and publicity, he landed a staffer position
on the Oregonian newspaper. Issues of biking safety were beginning to emerge
into the public debate. Traffic accidents, one of them involving a fatality, began
to crop up at intersections where motorists making turns were not aware of bikers
116 Crucibles of learning
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
on their flanks. Another ugly incident made headlines when a biker, confronted
by a bus driver and an angry bus passenger, came to blows. These are a few of
the many incidents that illustrated the growing problem of two cultures in the
throes of blending. Maus started his blog and began to be the beacon on these
issues for bikers.
Biker advocates like Mia Birk were on the European study tours along with
public officials, transport planners, politicians and businesspeople. They all saw
the simple genius of the bike corrals and green boxes, and when these ideas were
put on the blog, new knowledge was spread quickly. One degree away from Maus
was the biker in the traffic police division, and with support from the Mayor and
his biker-advocate, the first installations were in place in a matter of weeks.4 The
idea had spread quickly, reached a point of validation when viewed in situ, and
spread link by link into the right clusters of interest, from bikers, to traffic police,
the Mayor, and back.
This small example captures many of the main steps in learning. The identification
of an idea, in this case along the lines of Copenhagen and Amsterdam,
is recognized as closely related to the objectives in a community of interest—
the bikers. Then comes circulation of the idea for processing and deliberation
within practitioner circles as well as more widely in the community. Deeper and
more elaborate processing cutting across outside interest groups then leads
to more complete integration—in this case of biking into the regional transit
scheme, into the green pathways and walking routes, into City Hall and eventually
Metro’s plans. Associations of bikers have formed and have been influential in
a larger movement that seeks not only to integrate biking into the city’s transit
system but also into the local economy—for example, in biking destinations for
tourists, local organized “rides” (touring), local businesses that manufacture
equipment and apparel. Even pop culture has flowered from the biking community
(see Box 6.2).
Informal learners 117
Box 6.2 Pop culture of biking
One of the delights of cities is the creative pop cultures that emerge with
the propinquity of interests. In the case of Portland, bikers have shown
flair and playfulness in celebrating their culture. “Zoo bombers” are an
organized gathering of bikers who glide their favorite two-wheeler down
a hillside from the zoo into the city center in a high-speed parade. Subgroups
have formed to celebrate tiny bikes, tall bikes and sprocketless bikes; to play
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
In contrast to the examples discussed in the Turin case, the anecdotes about
improving biking safety in Portland illustrate the connections of already wellformed
groups turning over new ideas, evaluating their benefits and drawbacks,
and either helping out, getting out of the way or voicing opposition. The strategic
planning anecdotes in Turin, on the other hand, are about a strategic planning
group being formed on the march. The emphasis in Turin was on new relationships
as they were being created; the lesson from Portland is about the linkages
between groups. In both cases, effective knowledge exchange depends on trusted
relationships.
Internal trust networks
Planning and charting the city is carried out by a wide, but much smaller group
of actors. These may respond to political pressures and reflect the priorities and
interests of their constituents, but at early moments in the game, before political
interests and outcomes are entirely clear, city leaders are learning and exploring,
and it is this phase of the game—that of interactions among trusting members—
that is most crucial for developing future pathways of growth.
I conducted in Portland the same kind of exploratory analysis of participant
groups as in Turin. As noted earlier, the difference between the two cases is one
of maturity in formation. The Portland system is a collection of mature interest
groups. The graphics for Portland show eight distinct subgroups, representing
bikers, parks and urban wilderness, home builders, local commerce, business development
and manufacturing, economic development, and political and policy
interests, including Metro. These groups have formed and consolidated an identity
and exerted an influence over planning in Portland for the past two decades.
The Turin group on the other hand is new. Its members all had one thing in
common: direct participation in Turin’s strategic plans.
Accordingly, the graphics below depicting Portland networked groups are
not strictly comparable to those of Turin. Figure 6.2 shows the interconnections
among, for instance, the leader of the urban parks and wilderness group with
others in business, city officials, Metro and economic development, all of which
118 Crucibles of learning
bike polo, ride after hours (“Knight riders”), ride in costume, take part in
scavenger hunts and video contests; and, for fundraising and high art, to
take part in bridge breakfasts or bike in an operatic review in the park (the
zoo bombers and bridge breakfasters of course get permits and reserve
public spaces).
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
played a role in the creation of an interconnected wilderness parkway in Portland
and the surrounding communities. Comparisons of networks are discussed in more
detail in Chapter 10.
Benchmarking against other informal models
Turin has invented a process that created a series of overlapping networks among
what we might call the planning elites to figure out a way forward for the
city after the political and economic low in the 1990s. A somewhat similar invention
is still under way today in Charlotte, North Carolina. The difference is that
Charlotte already had a major clique that effectively forged a new image of
the city. Hugh McColl (Bank of America), Ed Crutchfield (First Union), Rolfe Neal
(Charlotte Observer) and Bill Lee (Duke Energy) formed a core of key players. Each
sat at the commanding heights of his respective domain—banking, newspaper
Informal learners 119
Figure 6.2 Cloud of trust in Portland
Key: red circles = interviewees; blue squares = trusted others
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
and media, electric utility. That group steered the city toward a wholesale
transformation, which is mostly complete today, at least in terms of the downtown
physical form.
But with the passing of the power elites and the banking crisis of 2009–2011,
Charlotte is now in a pickle. Key members of the clique are deceased, retired or
inactive. The future of the city’s main industry is in question. Meanwhile, a stillundefined
leadership in Charlotte has a handful of knotty problems to solve,
including leadership itself, a racial divide, inequities in schools, neighborhood
disparities, and growing immigration by Latino and other ethnic communities.
This is not to imply that the city is in disarray. On the contrary, social capital is
coming out of the woodwork to solve the city’s problems.
This is precisely the interesting feature about informal learning in Charlotte.
Without the stiff backbone of the old guard, how does the new generation form
a new, stable elite to guide the city? Turin’s problems were quite different. A new
leader appeared on the scene and immediately perceived the need to mobilize
civil society by forming linkages. In Portland, the learning process accreted over
time; new ideas were imported and digested within and among the many welldefined
interest groups.
Accordingly, the lessons Charlotte most needs to learn—those second-order
processes of engagement and trust—are not found in the most common forms
of external learning undertaken by the city. The Chamber of Commerce plays
the dominant role in organizing study missions, and the topics and targets for
the most part have not focused on rebuilding the leadership at the center. It was
perhaps for this reason that one of the most recent visits was to Charlotte itself.
The Chamber structured a round of internal visits and sparked something of an
awakening. Certainly the “self-visit” got rave reviews from the many participants.
Internal learning is the order of the day, and Charlotte’s many civic players,
led by the Foundation for the Carolinas, have picked up this mantle of service.
In Charlotte, leadership groups formed with the purpose of examining the very
idea of future leadership attract members from all the traditional institutions—
religious, civic, public and private. Moreover, foundation sponsors intentionally
work with partners to pair actors, individuals and organizations in a way that
forges inter-institutional ties. Identities and ideas are deliberately mixed so as to
achieve a blend. Interviews in Charlotte made it plain that these informal mechanisms
were critical to the processing of information and to break through to
new understandings.
The institutional tissue formed by these participatory efforts equates to informal
networks and nascent social capital. The interlacing creates ties across public,
private and civic sectors. These inter-digitations of civic roles perhaps constitute
the hallmark of modern governance and are vital for learning exchange.
120 Crucibles of learning
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
A glance at the cloud of trust in Charlotte gives a reflection of this crossover
design. As in Turin, the graphic in Figure 6.3 reflects a density of ties among key
actors. In this case, the graphic highlights crossovers between and among public,
private and civic members.
Conclusions
Turin, Portland and Charlotte fit the proactive-reformer mold, yet each had a
distinct task that was undertaken in an informal way. By any standard Turin
launched a unique and highly productive process of creating a new planning tissue
of networked groups that have lasted for more than two decades, but is now
dissipating. Portland is in full march, near the top of its game, processing new
ideas and sending them through the networked system of interest groups.
Charlotte is exerting energies to build a new layer of leaders. In each of these
cases, the process of learning and the discovery of new ideas help to forge a
cohesiveness, and in turn rely upon connectedness among key players.
Informal learners 121
Figure 6.3 Cloud of trust in Charlotte
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
Each of the cities started from different initial conditions. Portland with a big
bang of reform has been at the learning task much longer than the others. Turin
was launched into learning because of political and economic calamity. The Turin
story also suggests that the informal system that emerged from a cauldron of
deep crisis may be idiosyncratic and difficult not just to replicate in other cities
but to guide a renewal in Turin itself. Charlotte is at the very stage of forming a
leadership cadre. Can this city find the energy to form a new urban elite without
the prodding of a critical emergency?
Turin and Charlotte found their own ways to forge new links in their respective
networks of activists. Turin’s city leaders deliberately recruited actors from outside
the established elites and engaged them in a common challenge. Charlotte’s
informal leaders aimed at deliberately building bridges across communities. The
dynamic in Portland is a little more of a free-for-all held in place by an environmental
ethos. Each of the cities will need to sustain efforts to link and liberate
the latent potential in its social capital.
The key actors in these city stories consist of an amalgam of elected officials,
corporations and commercial establishments, developers and home builders,
neighborhood associations, NGOs and large civic institutions like universities and
hospitals. In each of these cities, any one member of these groups is only a few
degrees away from another. New knowledge acquired in one of them—about
bike corrals in Copenhagen, Olympic events in Barcelona, or the internal dynamics
within the home city itself—sooner or later flows into adjacent groups through
network contacts. But the speed and success of uptake depend in the first instance
on whether the idea is flowing across a bond of trust.
These informal cities, like many others with different styles, find themselves
facing constantly changing challenges, whether metro regional governance,
regional development, high-speed rail, keeping global talent or fiber optic
infrastructure. Meeting challenges requires some kind of system for learning
and innovation. The following chapter on technical learners, with Curitiba as
the protagonist, illustrates an entirely different system reflecting an utterly
different set of circumstances, yet learning, networking and innovation are also
part of the story.
Notes
1 The author wishes to acknowledge the generous support of the Gordon and Betty Moore
Foundation, which played a part in making possible the development of this chapter.
2 The fieldwork, conducted in Barcelona and Turin in June and July of 2009, was supported
by a grant from the Comparative Domestic Policy Program of the German Marshall Fund
of the United States.
122 Crucibles of learning
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
3 Today, 55 Italian cities are members of the network.
4 A fuller account of the biker story in Portland and beyond can be found in Birk et al.,
(2010).
References
Aydalot, P. (1986). Milieux innovateurs en Europe, GREMI, Paris.
Belligni, S., S. Ravazzi and R. Salerno (2008). L’élite che governa Torino. Il potere nella rete,
Political Science Department, University of Turin, Turin.
Birk, M., J. Kurmaskie and J. Moore (2010). Joyride: pedaling toward a healthier planet,
Cadence Press, Portland, OR.
Camagni, R. (1991). Innovation networks, Spatial Perspectives, London.
Camagni, R. (1995). “The concept of innovative milieu and its relevance for public policies
in European lagging regions,” Journal of the Regional Science Association, 74, pp.
317–340.
Cortright, J. and C. Colleta (2005). “The young and the restless: how Portland competes
for talent,” in J. Cortright and C. Colleta (eds), The young and the restless, Impresa
Consulting, Portland, OR.
Florida, R. (2002). The rise of the creative class, Basic Books, New York.
Informal learners 123
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
7 Technical learning: Curitiba and city think
tanks1
In contrast to the informal approach described in the last chapter is a more technical
mode of learning, as seen in places like Curitiba. The chief distinguishing
characteristic is the presence of some form of semi- or wholly independent think
tank, attached directly to City Hall or closely allied to it, consisting of professional
analysts who have a responsibility to research and develop ideas for the city.
Amman, Budapest, Curitiba, Ho Chi Minh City, Juárez, Lyon and Philadelphia are
a few of the many cities that have such a body. And though these cities vary in
the extent to which they press the advantage of a dedicated city think agency,
they share the distinction of having made an institutional and budgetary commitment
to generating, processing and storing knowledge. High levels of budgetary
commitment make it difficult for most places to clear the institutional threshold
to establish this model. And though it is effective for learning it has distinct drawbacks,
as we shall see by focusing on the case of Curitiba, Brazil.
The choice of Curitiba is based on the city’s long history of innovations in
multiple areas, making it a well-known case of good management. Bus rapid transit,
land use controls, green space and environmental sustainability are only a few
of the many innovations that Curitiba’s think tank has implemented over the past
four decades. Though it is often overshadowed by the famous native-son architect
and political leader Jaime Lerner, the think tank IPPUC (its Portuguese acronym
pronounced i-poo-kee, which stands for Instituto de Pesquisa y Planejamento
Urbano de Curitiba—Curitiba Institute for Urban Planning and Research) has
operated since the dawn of the city’s trend-setting changes in the 1960s.
In this sense, the agency is a device that functions in similar ways to Turin’s
informal networks. Both models gather and sift through ideas for possible application
to the city, and both show how dedicated attention can build a shared
vision over time and create a self-aware organization. But some aspects of the
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
freewheeling style and openness of Turin are not so easily achieved in technical
agencies like IPPUC. This chapter explores the roots of insights and learning,
showing how they mature into innovative changes in the city. Along the way,
we shall make reference to other cities with think tanks to illustrate the many
advantages of technical agencies, as well as their weaknesses, in generating new
knowledge, learning and innovating.
Founding moments in Curitiba—responding to growth
pressures
Capital of the state of Paraná and neighbor to São Paulo in central South Brazil,
Curitiba has 1.6 million inhabitants in the city proper and 2.3 million in the metropolitan
area. From the 1950s to the 1970s, Curitiba was Brazil’s fastest-growing
city. Beginning in the 1940s with the collapse of coffee prices, mechanization in
agriculture, and de-industrialization in the neighboring industrial powerhouse
of São Paulo, strong migratory flows pushed into Curitiba, its growth rates
reaching over 7 percent per year during some decades between the 1950s and
1980s.
Curitiba’s position as the state’s capital and center of services, together with
its central geographical location—linking agricultural production areas in the
west to the main port on the Atlantic coast—helped to fuel the city’s growth,
from 140,000 inhabitants in 1940 to 180,000 in 1950, and 360,000 by the 1960s.
The demographic transformation was brusque and unrelenting. In 1961 nearly
70 percent of the state’s population lived in rural areas, and by 1991 nearly 75
percent of the population lived in urban districts (Lowry, 2002).
Rapid growth brought problems and environmental challenges typical of
many cities in Latin America during its period of high rural-to-urban migration.
The city suffered from excessive spillovers in airborne and waterborne industrial
contaminants and congestion on the one hand, and, on the other, shortage of
facilities, infrastructure and services. One consequence of the demographic pressures
was that incoming populations began to settle in floodplains surrounding
the city, resulting in recurring losses of property and life when annual floods
reached into the low-lying areas of the spreading urban fringe.
The political context during this period was an important factor in shaping
options for the cities of Brazil. Just as Curitiba was about to give birth to a master
plan and to conceive IPPUC, Brazil was entering a military dictatorship (1964–
1979). Under military rule, cities were expected to follow the dictates of central
government irrespective of local sentiment. Cities were financially dependent
on the state and federal governments, making them vulnerable to changing
Technical learning 125
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
macroeconomic and political conditions. Local governments had very little autonomy
to launch initiatives or independently to establish their own priorities.
Second, at the outset of the era, the mass media were under censorship, and
public participation in political affairs was at times severely restricted. Public
involvement was nevertheless brought into the early planning stages in Curitiba
and would gradually increase.
Third, the military government gradually replaced import substitution policies
with inflows of foreign capital accompanied by a rise in major infrastructure
projects, many of them leading to an increase in urban investment. Most Brazilian
cities took advantage of that investment to build motorways and viaducts, thus
establishing the predominance of the private car. Curitiba, however, developed
an alternative course of action and created IPPUC to help implement it.
Planning process: the Agache Plan
The independent course chosen by Curitiba was in part made possible two decades
earlier in the 1940s with the Agache Plan, the first formal attempt to respond to
urban growth in Curitiba. The Agache Plan, named after French urban planner
Alfred Agache in 1943, proposed a well-defined central area surrounded by residential
zones, with a traffic system composed of concentric (ring) roads linked to
the central area by radial avenues. Agache’s spoke-and-wheel design reflected a
classic planning concept. He could not have known that the concept would be
overwhelmed by the powerful impact of booming ownership of private automobiles.
However, the plan did foresee and made provision for transit rights of way
along the spokes, and, fortunately for the city, some of these along with radial
rights of way were preserved over the decades. Though the city subsequently
grew beyond the physical limits envisaged by the Agache Plan, the outlines for
access to the periphery were in place.
126 Crucibles of learning
Box 7.1 Origins of urban planning in Curitiba
Toward the end of the 1940s and into the mid-1950s there began a
noteworthy transformation in Curitiba with the implementation of the
Preliminary Urban Plan. At this time, architect and city planner Alfredo
Agache, co-founder of the French Society of Urban Studies, wanted to introduce
a new standard of urban space design. Agache was commissioned to
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
In the 1960s when the pressures of growth were being felt acutely in the city,
Mayor Ivo Arzua Pereira commissioned a new urban plan for Curitiba adapted
to modern needs. In his words: “One of the sharpest needs felt by the population
was a revision of the Agache Plan, not because it had defects, but because (with
the growth of the city and state interference) it . . . had become obsolete.”2
In addition to the basic radial pattern, a key legacy of the Agache Plan was
the perception that planning could help solve problems arising from rapid urban
growth. This perception was acted upon in 1964 when the city government
organized a competition for the preparation of the “Preliminary Urban Plan,”
which later became the Curitiba Master Plan.
Curitiba Master Plan
Curitiba´s Preliminary Urban Plan was developed in 1964 by SERETE (Society of
Studies and Projects) and Jorge Wilheim of Associated Architects, with the
collaboration of local technicians. Among these technicians were Jaime Lerner
and Lubomir Ficinski, key figures whose vision of planning and expert guidance
were to be felt in Curitiba for many decades. Within a year, a series of public deliberations
and seminars was organized in partnership with the mayor’s office and
civil society on the topic of “Curitiba Tomorrow.” These events brought the plan
into public debate: its objectives of open and transparent planning engaged the
local population.
The general approach of the new plan was to improve the quality of life in
the city, and in particular to create an integrated transport system coordinated
with land use. These ideas aimed to reduce congestion and preserve the traditional
center of the city, to contain the growth of the city within its physical and
Technical learning 127
create an urban plan for Curitiba and designed a development scheme that
gave priority to public services such as sanitation, easing traffic congestion,
and creating centers that enabled the growth of both social life and commerce.
After two years of preparation, economic setbacks curtailed the full
implementation of the plan. However, initial parts of his plan included large
avenues, an obligatory setback of five meters from the curb as a buffer zone
for new buildings, an industrial district, the civic center and the municipal
market. While the Agache Plan was not completely realized, from its inception
it is evident that the people of Curitiba benefited from the visionary
framework it established.
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
territorial limits, and to create supportive economic conditions for urban development.
The master plan laid the groundwork for a range of transport innovations,
among them that commerce, services, and residential areas should expand in a
linear manner from the city center along “structural axes.” The plan laid out
guidelines to:
• change the radial urban growth trend to a more linear form by integrating
the road network, transport, and land use;
• decongest the central business district while preserving its historic center;
• manage, rather than prevent, population growth;
• provide economic support to urban development; and
• support greater mobility by improving infrastructure.
Profile and governance of IPPUC
City officials and planning elites in Curitiba—the mayors, leading political officials,
and planners—realized that a strong technical capacity would be needed to carry
the plan forward. Then Mayor Ivo Arzua, believing that a mere advisory office
would not be sufficient to lead the reforms foreseen in the plan, made sure that
a new agency had specific duties related to implementation. He sought and
obtained the support of the association of architects, commercial associations and
other interested groups to create a special body for this purpose.3
IPPUC was created in 1965 with its main mission the implementation of the
Master Plan. The Institute was founded as a municipal autarchy, giving it a certain
administrative and functional independence.4 It was governed by a board of
directors and had a deliberative council, chaired by the mayor, along with a
president. The board was composed mainly of the directors of departments in the
City Hall and city council representatives, with the Institute’s president, who was
appointed by the mayor. Despite these formal arrangements, IPPUC does not fit
the same corporatist mold as, say, Bilbao’s Metropoli-30, which is covered in the
next chapter. Metropoli-30 has a much broader, agenda-setting and visionary role
than does IPPUC.
At the heart of IPPUC were three technical departments (superintendencias);
one for planning, another for project execution, and a third for urban research.
In addition, support structures, including administration and finance, handled the
internal mechanisms of the institution’s operation. A Center of Data Processing
(CPD) was in charge of processing the data needed for municipal planning and
administration.
As an autarchy, the Institute was created with its own payroll, separate from
that of the municipal government. Although IPPUC expenses were approved by
128 Crucibles of learning
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
the board, independence in personnel and legal matters made it possible for the
Institute to escape the deadening impact often seen in the quasi-public or fully
public sector planning agencies of many Latin American cities.
Roots of learning in IPPUC
Having key political leaders and technical professionals on the board and council
made it easier to gain approval for IPPUC’s policies and work program. The deliberative
council was empowered to propose laws on matters that were important
but not considered in the Master Plan, such as land density regulations and fiscal
mechanisms. In addition, the council supervised the work of IPPUC in the implementation
of the plan.
IPPUC’s independence also made it easier to attract and contract professionals,
including foreign experts. According to Santoro, experts from Brazil and abroad
enriched the original proposals foreseen in the plan.5 Within a few years of its
founding, more than 60 technicians were working in IPPUC. Among them were
architects, engineers, lawyers, sociologists and educators. They were drawn from
pools of immigrants and fresh recruits—Polish, Chilean, Argentine, Bolivian and
French—all of them well traveled and for the most part hired on a competitive
basis. The Institute’s duties, according to Law 2660 of December 1, 1965, were:
1 to elaborate and direct to the executive branch a bill establishing Curitiba’s
Urban Plan;
2 to promote studies and research of an integrated plan for the development
of the municipality of Curitiba;
3 to judge bills and administrative measures that could impact the municipality’s
development in all of its aspects;
4 to create conditions for implementation and continuity, which would allow
a constant adaptation of sectoral and global plans to the dynamics of municipal
development;
5 to make the local plan compatible with regional or state plan guidelines.
IPPUC’s first bylaws, approved by Decree 1910/65, added other duties, such
as:
6 preparation of studies aiming to improve adaptation of municipal works to
the Municipal Master Guiding Plan along with tax or administrative restrictions
and incentives needed for the implementation of the Master Plan;
7 exploration of the feasibility of sectoral programs;
8 the promotion of agreements with technical entities and universities for the
training of professionals;
Technical learning 129
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
9 offering internships to university students; and
10 the execution of other activities linked to urban development.
These remits involved research and developmental functions ranging from basic
data gathering, to concept schemes, to site plans and engineering, and even to
forecasting. In other words, the Institute was charged with generating and developing
data and information about the city and translating it into proposals and
plans based on objective evidence.
As a part of the mission, IPPUC technicians scouted out ideas and practice
from around the nation. For example, in 1967, a year after Curitiba’s city council
approved the city’s Master Plan, which had been prepared by IPPUC, an agreement
was ratified between the State of Paraná’s government and 10 municipalities
that were part of Curitiba’s metropolitan region. This resulted in the creation of
the Metropolitan Council, of which IPPUC was a part, and which considered
development issues over the entire urbanized region of greater Curitiba. IPPUC’s
participation in this agreement allowed it to prepare technical studies and
program works related to integrated regional planning, in addition to coordinating
works, projects, services and activities of interest to the whole region. With
this swift organizational step, IPPUC was put in position to develop proposals and
projects for a wide metropolitan area without the usual problems of partisan
political bickering.
By the end of 1967, Curitiba had created an agency not only engaged in the
mechanics of urban growth, but also able to take initiative on issues and practices
that could affect the sustainability of development over a wide area. Directly
linked to the mayor’s office and with a status above municipal departments
(secretários do município), IPPUC was capable of following and studying as well
as providing for the implementation through project contracting of all of the
major elements in the city’s growth process. Moreover, though not conceived as
an institution dedicated to sustainability, IPPUC had in its founding terms of
reference all the elements the institution needed to achieve sustainable development
(Oliveira, 2001).
Mechanisms of success in sustainability—channeling advice
to the city
Though it moved through various phases—at first active, then quiet in the face
of public reaction, then active again—IPPUC created a long record of contributions
to various aspects of urban development in the city. Santoro and Leitmann (2004)
and Oliveira (2001) see the early years in several distinct phases. An initial period
that Oliveira calls “institutionalization” (1962–1966, see above) was followed by
130 Crucibles of learning
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
an incubation period (1965–1970), at which time conflicts arose over the vision
and strategy of projects conceived by IPPUC on the one hand and, on the other,
those developed by the municipal administration. During this period, in Oliveira’s
words, IPPUC was “in the icebox,” its actions and activity on hold (Oliveira, 2001:
99). During this period, IPPUC developed projects under its director Jaime Lerner.
Beginning in 1970 with the appointment of Lerner as mayor, IPPUC launched its
first important phase of implementation.
The rough chronological order follows the evolution of thinking and trial
and error concerning land use, transport and social and environmental issues in
Curitiba. Each section illustrates a modality of action—on learning and innovative
solutions—to problems that are common in fast-growing cities.
Establishing rudiments of urban form—1967–1972
The use of land and a special program for vehicles and pedestrian circulation
became the focus of attention under Mayors Ivo Arzua and Jaime Lerner, with
engineers José Portella and later Cássio Tanigushi directing the Institute. IPPUC
began to plan radical changes for the city. The key features of restructuring would
be linear access routes radiating out from the city, along with the creation of new
residential and commercial establishments formed with the help of land use
controls, zoning measures and building regulations.
One of the seminal and most difficult proposals advanced by IPPUC was a large
sidewalk mall in the middle of downtown, later to become Flower Street. The
idea was to keep the block free from automobiles and reserved for pedestrians.
Though common in many cities today, the idea of a pedestrian mall in the city
center was unheard of in Brazil at that time. Initially, the idea was hatched in
IPPUC based on examples of European pedestrian streets, which were beginning
to emerge in downtown core areas. Several of the IPPUC staff, and Lerner himself,
having traveled, worked or lived in Europe, were aware of these developments.
Lerner’s acute sense of design was quick to see the logic in the alternative use of
commercial street space. The trick would be to implant the idea in a form that
would be acceptable to commercial interests.
Lerner’s team in IPPUC pored over the Master Plan and selected a single block
in downtown Curitiba for a pilot project. The proposal aroused stiff opposition
from commercial businesses in the city center. Shop owners felt that their success
depended upon access by and parking spaces for private automobiles. In contrast,
the IPPUC team and Lerner in particular felt that the first step in gaining control
over the automobile was the creation of automobile-free areas downtown.
Many meetings were required with the Chamber of Commerce and other
departments before IPPUC, using technical arguments, eventually persuaded
Technical learning 131
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
these groups that the proposed closing of downtown streets made sense. One
element in the argument was that Flower Street was not an isolated project, but
rather was part of a larger scheme to manage traffic flows in and out of the city.
The IPPUC plan would divert traffic to parallel streets. But resistance was still quite
strong. Lerner then adopted a quick-strike strategy, closing the selected block
for a street fair on a Sunday during which schoolchildren could participate in an
art project that was spread across the street surface. The combination of the fair
and a larger than normal pedestrian flow of parents, regular shoppers and
schoolkids carried the day, and the pedestrian mall idea took hold.
Succeeding phases of the transit plan began to widen the focus to larger
questions of traffic flow, congestion, access and pedestrian ways. This sequence
of steps produced a signal feature that is seen in many other places: an innovation
that is initially relatively small opens the door to far wider change.
The rather small step—in Curitiba’s case the closing of a single block—demonstrated
the possibility of vibrant commercial life without automobiles in a dense,
downtown area. That initial change, embellished by enhanced use of the street
with flower vendors and civic activities like street painting by schoolchildren,
demonstrated a new, convivial use of space. Resistance by commerciantes began
to evaporate as once-a-week closures gave way to a permanent arrangement.
Gradually, the larger public began to see the advantages of this re-arrangement
in the way the city worked.
IPPUC technical planners built on this initial innovation by adopting additional
European and home-cooked ideas into the scheme, such as extending the pedestrian
mall, establishing parallel one-way routes in alternate blocks, and designating
“fast routes” to run from neighborhoods to downtown, greatly facilitating
access to the city center. Though the ideas were not complicated technically, IPPUC
and the administration had to spend three years developing these initial changes
and achieving consensus before the transit plan would become reality.
Later, new routes were created for the traffic flows crossing Curitiba´s
traditional downtown. Buses were given dedicated lanes. Small lane curbs were
built to help ward off intruding automobile traffic. Running parallel to main
transit lines were single lanes that functioned as access ways for neighborhood
traffic. Density changes were introduced to encourage commercial and real estate
development along the access corridors in order to take advantage of and
mutually support public transit.
With these main components of the traffic management plan, the rudimentary
elements of Latin America’s first rapid bus transit system were put in place. The
dominance of the automobile was being broken in Curitiba. More important, a
platform was established that enabled much more elaborate and larger-scale
systems to be built up in the following years.
132 Crucibles of learning
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
Education of the public was no small part of the solution. IPPUC helped to
develop materials, film, television pieces and pamphlets to accompany the plans
and educate the public. A publicity campaign helped the citizens to see the new
and emerging patterns of accessing the city and managing the use of urban
land.
The Curitiba story illustrates vividly the effective use of a technical team when
managed by a talented and visionary planner like Jaime Lerner. His genius is
captured in the seminal experience of Flower Street. Lerner and his team did not
merely transplant the idea of pedestrian malls from European cities. The genius
was in seeing the potential and adapting the concept into a much larger scheme
of city traffic, but most of all, showing how this innovation could be introduced
into an otherwise reluctant environment. A decade later, the technical team,
this time with Lerner as mayor, would produce a much wider and equally innovative
transit scheme for the entire city.
Structuring the transport system—1972–1983
The next phase of development for IPPUC and the city of Curitiba is marked by
three factors. The first is the appointment, by the governor, of two technicians
as mayors—Jaime Lerner and Saul Ruiz—both of whom were familiar with and
relied upon the planning, urban development, and expertise of IPPUC. Both
retained the same director, Lubomir Ficinski. This continuity of thought and personnel
signaled a growing acceptance and rising technical strength of the Institute
as a thought leader for the city.
The remaining factors helping to define this phase originated outside Curitiba.
In 1973, the oil crisis brought a doubling of gasoline prices. The price shocks helped
to strengthen the conviction of Curitiba’s leadership in supporting extensive public
transportation. Not long afterward, in 1975, Curitiba felt the effects of the second
exogenous influence: the city became one of the beneficiaries of proceeds from
a World Bank loan to improve public transit in the cities of Brazil. IPPUC would
play a key role in meeting these challenges.
Integration of land use and public transport
IPPUC technicians began to develop a broader road scheme for the entire city
that took advantage of the basic premise of integrated road and land use. An
express route for the exclusive use of buses ran north and south, forming the
central axis between the “fast lanes” already developed. With 30-meter widths,
the lanes provided ample volume for through traffic. At the same time, pedestrian
and slower traffic was accommodated on parallel strips.
Technical learning 133
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
In addition, a new land use plan was approved. Taking a lead from European
rights of way planning, IPPUC proposed building regulations that permitted
construction of up to 22 times the areal size of the land between the “fast routes.”
The Master Plan required that buildings facing streets of public transportation
have a fixed percentage of their areas dedicated to commercial establishments.
On streets that crossed fast lanes, construction was allowed up to 12 times the
area of the land and had to have five-meter setbacks. In this way a pyramid of
land use density was being formed.
With trial and error, IPPUC and other technicians determined that it was
desirable to increase the density of built-up areas even further. Other initiatives
expanded parking and created a beltway around the city to relieve pressure and
interruptions from traffic cutting through the downtown area merely to get to
the other side of town (Ranhagen and Trobeck, 1998).
These solutions were a blend of homegrown ingenuity and borrowing of ideas
from many places. IPPUC drew on practices that were beginning to emerge in
many cities in Brazil and around the world. But IPPUC’s visible and proactive role
in applying lessons began to attract the attention of the state and federal
governments, and this exposure enhanced the role and legitimacy given to IPPUC.
A short time later, Curitiba received US$54 million as a part of proceeds from yet
another World Bank loan. Interaction with transport planners and engineers from
the World Bank and consultants brought in from many parts of the world served
to increase IPPUC technicians’ access to world-class knowledge in transport
planning.
IPPUC was made the supervising agency for national transport projects
managed by the federal transport authorities (Empresa Brasileira de Transporte
Urbano, EBTU). With growing capacity and confidence, access to loan funds
allowed IPPUC and the city to accelerate projects that had already been started—
for instance, in road paving, public lighting and transport terminals. As a consequence,
Curitiba sprang forward relative to its own timetable and relative to
other cities taking part in the EBTU World Bank urban transport project. In effect,
IPPUC’s presence made the difference in speed and effectiveness of change.
With each expansion and improvement, it became possible to build onto the
existing platform of innovations, for instance in signaling systems, buses and
tariffs. With the help of technicians from Europe, IPPUC’s technical department
created a traffic control center and drew upon experience in the Netherlands,
Germany and the US of an electronically coordinated signaling system that relied
on TV cameras and electronic scanners installed in the roadway at strategic places
in the main intersections in town. These fed data to a computerized control system
that regulated traffic lights, enabling “green waves” and speedier traffic
flow for special periods during the day. Though it is common in many cities of
134 Crucibles of learning
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
today, IPPUC was among the first of Brazilian cities to make use of high-tech
gear in traffic management.
One of the most important innovations was in transit revenues. Partly due
to the pressure of the oil crisis, IPPUC began work on a unified tariff scheme for
public transport. In 1979, a system of single tariffs—part of the Integrated
Transportation Network (RIT)—was established across the city. This innovation
made it possible for operators of small bus lines, including feeder and transfer
lines on the periphery where little money could be made, to stay in service. A
cross-subsidy built into the integrated transportation network compensated
operators on smaller and less popular routes, while larger ones running bus routes
in the more lucrative downtown areas could still turn a profit (Rabinovitch and
Leitmann, 1996).
The idea of revenue sharing underscores a feature of planning in Curitiba
that runs right through the city’s experience from the very beginning of IPPUC.
The many innovations in Curitiba contributed and benefited from an intangible
factor that characterized planning in the 1970s and 1980s. An atmosphere had
been created in Curitiba in which planning was an accepted practice. The visible
and interventionist role of IPPUC was tolerated partly because the system had
demonstrated concrete achievements. Building up step by step, planning, and
particularly transit planning, could point to tangible benefits and these in turn
reinforced a sense of acceptance in the wider political environment. These
circumstances were tested in a subsequent period of development.
Technical learning 135
Box 7.2 Coordinating and managing public works
In March 1977 the municipality signed an agreement that drew upon IPPUC’s
comparative advantage in data gathering and management to improve
coordination of public works and services. IPPUC’s Data Processing Center
together with other units developed a management system for public works
on roads. Later they began to compile an urban infrastructure information
system. The management and information systems were intended to
increase the efficiency of the supervision process, improve production of
reports, and streamline evaluation of contractors and cadastre information
by tracking subterranean networks of water pipes, drainage and sewerage
lines, underground wires, gas lines, and other infrastructure.
IPPUC created and maintained an up-to-date database of urban spaces.
With the introduction of computers, IPPUC could authorize works almost
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
Applying innovation to environmental and social issues
The discussion about IPPUC’s role in learning and innovation has been quite
selective so far, because it has focused on a specific segment of history and a
narrow range of applications in transit and land use. Brazil’s transition from
military to civilian leadership beginning in the 1980s brought new and powerful
currents of economic change. First, a protracted period of hyperinflation drove
the cost of living up by thousands of percentage points per year. Brazil’s macroeconomic
performance, and particularly its efforts to control inflation, became
an all-consuming effort throughout the 1980s. Second, in the latter half of the
1980s Brazil entered a period of political and administrative decentralization, in
which a new constitution and reforms of the state were to bring about popular
election of mayors and new powers and prerogatives in planning, spending and
management for all of Brazil’s local governments.
The first elections in Curitiba were won by somewhat populist figures whose
political objectives aimed in part to soften the impact of hyperinflation on the
poor. The city elected two consecutive populist governments between 1983 and
1988. The period was also marked by strong partisan political influences. Because
IPPUC was largely identified with the party out of favor, the organization began
to shape an adaptive strategy. It shifted its focus from physical infrastructure
toward a more socially relevant agenda. At the same time, IPPUC was downgraded
from a semi-autonomous agency directly linked to the mayor to a typical
municipal bureau (secretariat), on a par with public works and engineering. Many
foreign technicians left the Institute. Shifts in the political environment at the
national level influenced the allocation of international financial assistance, which
was diverted to other cities, drying up external financial flows once enjoyed by
IPPUC.
Yet IPPUC was left with a heritage of valuable assets in the form of large
databases on social and physical infrastructure, including a geographical information
system that covered schools, health clinics and daycare centers in each of
seven distinct regions that had been identified by socio-economic and research
units beginning in the late 1970s. In 1985, IPPUC participated in the census of
Curitiba together with the Brazilian Institute of Statistics (IBGE). A new data
136 Crucibles of learning
immediately and inform contractors and state agencies about the subterranean
networks existing in the section, thus avoiding accidental destruction
and breakdowns. The database grew to include bus routes in service, open
markets, schools, parking lots, gas stations and hospitals.
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
management unit was created (SCITAN), and it mapped highly detailed information
for every city block. Today, IPPUC’s data form the basis for cadastre
registers (land ownership and value) for the municipality and provide an important
input to IBGE for the national census on residential housing carried out every
10 years.
This database came in handy for social planning. With the turn toward social
concerns, the structuring of neighborhood associations began to be encouraged
and consolidated, and IPPUC could offer comparative data to deal directly with
these associations. About 500 neighborhood associations were organized by the
populist local governments, and IPPUC played a role in exploring or creating sitespecific
solutions for problems in many of these neighborhoods. For instance,
about 50 daycare centers and 25 health clinics were created to extend better
service in selected areas of town. IPPUC’s technical units in social analysis began
to work more closely with municipal bureaus of health, youth and education.
IPPUC took part in creating many social innovations during this period (see
Box 7.3, below). The “trash that is not trash” program is one of the most inventive.
Squatter settlements in Curitiba, as in most cities of Latin America, form in high
densities in areas such as hillsides and flood plains. In these areas, customary
mechanized methods of solid waste removal do not work well. The “trash that
is not trash” program was aimed at solving this problem. The first step was to
shift popular understanding about household wastes. The central idea was
to create incentives for residents in favela areas to recycle their own wastes in
exchange for bus tokens, and later food staples.
Residents separated and recycled waste, carrying it to dumpsters placed conveniently
around the edge of densely settled areas. A private contractor emptied
the dumpster bins once a week, and took the bags to a processing center owned
by the city. The facility employed homeless people and recovering alcoholics to
sort the trash into their respective waste streams by type. The trash-purchase
scheme and the “trash that is not trash” program were linked. The proceeds from
the sale of the recycled materials went to finance the purchase of surplus food
from farmers. The food was then given in exchange for collected trash (Tlayle and
Biller, 1994: 92).
Technical learning 137
Box 7.3 Social innovations
These and other schemes arose in part due to a shift in focus onto fine-grain
social problems, in keeping with the electoral changes registered at the
polls during the difficult economic times of the late 1980s. IPPUC analysts
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
138 Crucibles of learning
were involved directly and indirectly in the creation of numerous innovations
to solve typical urban problems. Besides trash recycling, other
programs helped to solve the problems of congestion and the choking of
downtown streets by street vendors.
• The problem of street vendors clogging thoroughfares is common
throughout the developing world. In Curitiba, the number of vendors
reached a peak in the mid-1980s. IPPUC participated in the organization
of these small-scale merchants (often known as the “informal sector”)
into an association, in which 600 people were registered. A visual communication
program was launched to support a project to design and
build 600 metal carts on wheels. These were attractively painted, covered
with small awnings and placed in regulated parking lots in 200 corners
in the downtown area. The carts were leased at low rates to the vendors,
who through their own association exerted a preventive force to keep
new “informal” vendors from establishing themselves in the downtown
area.
• One of the most notable innovations was the “tube station.” Shaped
like a long cylinder, the station is an above-grade loading platform
where passengers embark and disembark at the level of the bus carriage,
much like a passenger platform at a metro station. Bus fares are paid
inside the tube before boarding. These two innovations—level of entry
and pre-paid fares—greatly accelerated the speed of passenger transit
time between bus stops. In a second innovation, small express buses
(ligeirinhos) were added on fast routes with fewer stops. The combination
of these changes helped to solve the problem of traffic jams.
• In 1985, a compulsory transportation voucher, to be deducted from
worker payrolls, was established by federal law. Curitiba was well prepared
to implement this policy. Transportation vouchers in the form of
coins had already been created. These were sold in advance and kept
their value for public transit in spite of constant increases in the cost of
living during hyperinflationary years.
• All of the schools teaching physically or mentally handicapped students
were registered with the city. Buses amended regular routes to cover
those schools, with public servants working as attendants in these buses
between home and school.
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
Flood control and parks
Curitiba lies at the confluence of several key tributaries that flow to the Paraná
River at the border between Brazil, Paraguay and Argentina. One feeder system,
dominated by the Iguaçu River, cuts through Curitiba. When the city was small,
the rise of the Iguaçu during the rainy season was uneventful because a wide
floodplain absorbed the high waters. Starting in the 1950s, the city’s horizontal
expansion spread onto this floodplain, resulting in chronic losses of property
and life.
Engineering solutions to this problem were unsuccessful because channeling
the rivers simply transferred the floods to other areas. City authorities realized
that it was necessary to recover the floodplain. A concerted effort to expropriate
areas along the courses of the rivers and build small dams led to the creation
of large parks and lakes that today are Curitiba’s main recreational sites.
Concurrently, new land use regulations regarding the division of land into plots
for housing development prohibit the construction of streets and buildings in
strips subject to flooding.
In creating parklands and recreational areas, IPPUC was instrumental in
devising and analyzing land swaps and management schemes. For instance, the
Passaúna Park was created to protect a river and its system of springs that supply
one-third of Curitiba’s water. The area was declared an “environmental protection
area” under legislation that grants tax incentives for the preservation of forest
cover. Further, the law allows only up to 30 percent of the area to be used for
construction. The choice of sites and the building parameters are subject to local
approval. Similarly, new housing developments in non-drainage areas must dedicate
35 percent of the land area to the public domain for environmental purposes.
The overall result is a city with one of the highest ratios of green areas per
capita (50 square meters per inhabitant) among Western cities, providing its
citizens ample recreational and cultural sites, more than 140 km of bicycle paths,
neighborhood parks, and in-city forest reserves (Tlayle and Biller, 1994). With
the expansion of park and flood control areas, Curitiba increased green space
per capita by a factor of 10, giving the city a claim to being “an ecological city.”
Oliveira (2001) challenges this claim, suggesting that environmental sustainability
of parkland, solid waste and transport were more of a packaged afterthought
than an explicit objective driving these programs. Whether premeditated or not,
the progress and innovative solutions to typical urban problems produced results
that are studied and replicated in many cities in Latin America.
Some of the ideas for these innovations were dreamt up locally, others were
borrowed from outside. Land swaps to accommodate control over floodplains
were inspired by Japan’s land-swap system. The Normandy Basin Authority in
Technical learning 139
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
France shared its educational kits to measure water quality for use by students
in secondary educational institutions. Some novelties originated inside IPPUC,
such as educating children and parents about riverways and flood risk using
creative devices like colorful artwork depicting inquisitive fish painted on elevator
walls and in school stairwells. The fish inquired of the viewer: “Where is the
nearest water?” The images implanted a daily reminder about the city’s relationship
to natural waterways and its vulnerability to floods.
Other think tank cities
IPPUC in Curitiba may not be the first or even the best think tank for a city.6 But
IPPUC represents a sustained and productive record of innovations over five
decades. Moreover, the IPPUC case illustrates many key lessons that other cities—
Juárez and Amman are discussed below—have learned in adopting a technical
learning model like a think tank.
IMIP in Juárez
Though Juárez has been overwhelmed in recent years by the devastating violence
of arms and drug trade between Mexico and the US, the city set a standard for
planning with the its Instituto Municipal de Investigación y Planeación (IMIP—
Municipal Institute for Planning and Research). In 1994, Francisco Villareal, one
of the mayoral candidates for Juárez, visited Curitiba to learn more about its
successes. He was impressed with the way IPPUC was shielded from partisan
political influences in the management of day-to-day technical decisions. The
short terms of office in the Mexican municipal system precluded the institutionalization
of technical capacity. A typical scenario featured a new mayor every
three years and a wholesale turnover of technical staff along with those holding
posts of confidence. Sometimes even files and archives about municipal business
were removed from offices with the outgoing administration.
After he was elected, Villareal founded IMIP. By having IMIP created in state
legislation, he aimed to build a strong wall of separation from political influence
and to lay the groundwork for institutional stability. In addition, the enabling
legislation stipulated that private and civic individuals were placed on the board,
that the board was empowered to hire the director, and that the terms of office
were staggered with those of municipal elections.
With a guaranteed percentage of the municipal budget, and the rights
to hire and fire employees on a private sector basis, IMIP enjoyed success. Its
140 Crucibles of learning
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
independence allowed it to build up a strong professional team. In turn, highquality
technical work earned the respect of business and civic and local officials.
These factors helped to clear away conflicts of interest in land use planning and
to manage urban growth. The management system had an open style. Each of
the half dozen key topical areas—for example, land, legal, social, geographical
information system (GIS)—was managed by a technical coordinator. The team
members were encouraged to challenge each other and were permitted to speak
independently with the public and the press.
The founding director, Luis Felipe Siqueiros, feels that the rich backgrounds
of his technical staff were especially important for IMIP’s research, which the
director feels is one of the institute’s main functions. The team put together highquality
maps and data based on a geographical information system that covered
the social and physical parameters of the city. IMIP built a library of documents,
maps and planning materials, including interactive data from the GIS. The library
became one of the most important in northern Mexico.
That richness was strengthened by regular sabbatical visits from Brazilians.
According to one World Bank officer, Curitiba began to refer to IMIP as its “franchise”
in Mexico.7 Exposure to outside ideas helped to form the technical and
operating style of IMIP. Periodic exchanges on the part of the director to Canada,
the US and Europe built upon years of academic study in France. Both the director,
who earned his doctorate in urban planning in Paris, and the mayor, who spent
years in Paris, were strongly influenced by European urbanism.
Institutes similar to IMIP began to spring up in other cities in Mexico. León
established its own planning institute at about the same time as IMIP was being
formed. By 2005, 11 institutes belonged to the Mexican Association of Municipal
Planning Institutes and nearly 30 more were in the process of formation.
Ai in Amman
A similar pattern of exerting rational control over urban planning is found in
Amman, Jordan with the founding of the Amman Institute (Ai) in 2005. The
Ai was created on the fly, so to speak, to cope with burgeoning speculative
construction of high-rise buildings in downtown Amman. The pooling of petrodollars
in oil-exporting countries, together with tensions in several countries of the
Middle East, stand in contrast to the relative stability of Jordan, making Amman
an attractive place for investment. Proposals for dozens of high-rise towers
financed by funds from Iraq, Saudi Arabia and other Middle Eastern nations began
to flood into the city for approval in the early 2000s. The first of these produced
large, speculative buildings that were out of character with their surroundings;
Technical learning 141
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
sitting on the ridge outcroppings of Amman’s many arroyos, they were conspicuous
in size, prominence and form.
Alarmed at the prospect of runaway growth, King Abdullah II turned to his
mayor, Omar Maani, a successful entrepreneur whom the King had recently
appointed. Through the Prime Minister, the King instructed Maani to prepare
new regulations and land use plans for the downtown area. Maani in turn mobilized
the expertise of BearingPoint consultancy, which was already on contract
to the city to conduct real estate analysis. Seeing the broad scope of work and
far-reaching implications of the new plan, one of BearingPoint’s principals, Gerry
Post, proposed that the team being assembled for the analysis and planning effort
be transformed into a city-owned, for-profit entity, which came to be called the
Amman Institute. Ai has undertaken a half-dozen innovative initiatives to tax
building, reform the business process and reshape the organizational structure
of the city, improve transit and solid waste, and mobilize popular participation
in city affairs.
The pressure of growth and need for fresh planning expertise were part
of the impetus for city think tanks in many cities, including Ho Chi Minh City,
Budapest and Philadelphia. Think tanks or technical teams owned by or formed
within their respective cities grew up organically. For instance, the Institute for
Development Studies (IDS) in Ho Chi Minh City and the Economy League in
Philadelphia evolved over time. The IDS is the latest incarnation of a city agency
with a tradition of research, analysis and advice, particularly in connection with
land development in Ho Chi Minh dating back to before the Vietnam War. The
agency gathers and maintains data on land, property markets and building,
conducts studies and forecasts trends.
The Economy League of Philadelphia arose from a tradition of industrial
efficiency in the early 20th century. The Economy League cut its teeth by gathering
the equivalent of time and motion data for the city. The mission gradually morphed
over the decades to become a watchdog, a conductor of studies, an analyst
of data, and more recently a convener with an appetite to play a stronger mobilization
role in building a constituency for economic development in the greater
Philadelphia area, covering nine counties and parts of four states (New Jersey,
New York, Pennsylvania and Delaware).
Comparing think tanks
IPPUC, IMIP and Ai may be neither the first nor even the best think tanks, but they
do represent sustained and productive records. With the help of Table 7.1 we
can examine some of the key features that each of these cases has in common
142 Crucibles of learning
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
with the others. These include the circumstances of their origin, organizational
and financial relationships with the mother city, and the dimension of learning
and “atmospherics” related to innovation.
Origins and structure
IPPUC originated with the conviction that a strong institution would be needed
to implement Curitiba’s Master Plan, and behind this conviction lay the urgency
Technical learning 143
Table 7.1 Comparing think tanks
Factors Curitiba Juárez Amman Economy
IPPUC IMIP Ai League of
Greater
Philadelphia
How are Floods, Idea transfer Emerging wave Business
they born congestion, from Curitiba of speculative community
strong leader model, need for high-rise wanted
and planning independent construction efficiency
tradition analysis downtown studies of
leads to Royal public sector
imperative (1909)
Relationship Private, city Autonomous Private, city Work on
to the city owns main public, city on main projects in
share, sits on board shareholder, relation to the
board earns revenues city
Finance City budget, Fixed City budget, Business and
consulting percentage of consulting individual
revenues, fees city budget, revenues, tax contributions,
for service consulting fees increment foundation
shares support,
project
counselling fees
Learning Internal Internal staffing, Internal staffing, Internal
modality staffing, some exchange international staffing,
extensive exchange growing
exchange domestic
exchange
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
of protecting the city from disorganized growth that was leading to vulnerability
of losses in flooding and increasing congestion. These tasks required some
degree of functional autonomy as well as certainty about income, both of which
were built into its original design. These in turn provided a degree of insulation
from political interference in connection with choice of issues and scope of intervention.
Fortunately for Curitiba, many of the outcomes related to these issues
were favorable, and management control by the governing council, with broadbased
linkages to stakeholders, helped to maintain its autonomy to some degree.
Getting a hold of key issues like land is a common theme that runs right across
the examples in Table 7.1. Perhaps the most telling example of this, and one that
is fitting in the learning context, is the formation of IMIP in Juárez, Mexico.
Making a living
Financial sustainability is perhaps the most pressing issue facing city think tanks.
Unless they are created by a higher-level jurisdiction, and therefore likely to be
protected, think tanks are vulnerable to rising and falling political fortunes. All
were put on a partially commercial footing and all were able to hire on a market
basis, a factor that is important both in keeping high standards in professional
skill areas and also in ensuring the caliber of people needed to create new value
in knowledge generation. The think tanks vary in the extent to which they meet
a market test by selling data or analysis, but rarely are more than half the recurrent
costs met in this way. For example, Ai earns 40 percent of its income from outside
of Jordan, and IPPUC has long sold transport and data services to cities and states
in Brazil.
Learning modality and atmospherics
The many innovations in Curitiba contributed to and benefited from an intangible
factor that characterized planning in the 1970s and 1980s. For starters, an atmosphere
had been created in Curitiba in which planning was an accepted practice,
and IPPUC had a visible and interventionist role, with concrete achievements. With
a string of solid accomplishments, followed by creative invention, IPPUC earned
acceptance as a think group. In the beginning, one of IPPUC’s strongest comparative
advantages was its high-quality professional staff and an internal working
environment that was characterized by encouragement of what today is called
“out of the box” thinking. Jaime Lerner, the one-time director and several-time
mayor of Curitiba, told me that in the early days of the organization the atmosphere
144 Crucibles of learning
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
was “wide open” and the think tank idea was accentuated by experimentation.
IPPUC was filled with confident young professionals eager to solve problems.
IMIP in Juárez and IDS in Ho Chi Minh operate on a more conservative basis,
even though both institutions are known for creative thinking. The Amman
Institute, on the other hand, has a leadership and ethos clearly imbued with the
idea of openness. The CEO and founder takes pains to cross-fertilize ideas among
his people, pair them with thoughtfully chosen mentors, and encourage new
projects. Each principal staff member is responsible for creating and launching
an off-budget community activity. Philadelphia’s Economic Leadership is in the
process of a transformation that, according to its CEO Stephen Wray, will require
more open, progressive and creative thinking.
Closing thoughts
Curitiba’s think tank was founded under circumstances that are not uncommon
in cities of the developing world. As often with cases of innovation and leadership,
the triggering conditions were a sense of crisis—of health care, fiscal pressure or
natural calamity (Campbell and Fuhr, 2004). Population pressures, flooding, traffic
congestion and the oil crisis all accompanied IPPUC’s founding and then tested
its capacity to help the city. Each challenge became a proving ground for IPPUC.
For the most part, IPPUC met the tests. It did so because the agency could count
on political and financial support and above all on an ethos of openness and
creativity.
“It is invented here, not by the French,” one technician told me proudly, referring
to an early version of the bus rapid transit systems. Besides the bus system,
coordinated signaling, revenue sharing, and boarding and ticketing platforms,
a long series of innovations in related and distant areas include land planning,
density management, trash collection, flood control, relocation, and social welfare.
All these were invented with the collaboration if not the sole authorship of
IPPUC. Ideas were harvested from many sources, internally from other cities in
Brazil, and from around the world. The IPPUC case illustrates only one of many
think tank models, and these in turn are but one group in a family of modalities
that cities use to learn and innovate. The agency was set up to inject novel ideas
directly into the city for debate and implementation. In the next chapter, we
examine another distinct corporate model in which learning and innovation
depend on a thick interconnection of city and state agencies.
Technical learning 145
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
Notes
1 The author wishes to acknowledge the generous support of the Gordon and Betty Moore
Foundation, which helped to make possible the development of this chapter.
2 “Criacao do IPPUC,” IPPUC website, 2005: http://www.ippuc.org.br/ippuc/index.
3 Among the many supporters contracted were Jaime Lerner, Luis Fortes Neto, Joel
Ramalho and José Gandolfi, who were later absorbed by City Hall.
4 Law 2660, of December 1, 1965, and regulated by Decree 1910, of December 7, 1965.
5 Personal communication with Roberto Santoro, Operations Director, Serviço Autonomo
Paranácidade, autonomous agency for urban development in the state of Paraná.
6 James McGann, University of Pennsylvania, maintains a database of 6000 think tanks
around the world and manages a running evaluation (see www.sas.upenn.edu/irp/). By
his estimate a significant fraction offer services to cities, but the number of city-based
think tanks is not known.
7 Victor Vergara of the World Bank followed the origins and aftermath of IMIP and
recounted this story in a personal communication.
References
Campbell, T. and H. Fuhr (2004). Leadership and innovation in subnational government.
Case studies from Latin America, WBI Development Series, World Bank Institute,
Washington, DC.
Lowry, I. S. (2002). Municipal development in Paraná. Policies and programs, 1981–2001,
Paranácidade, Curitiba.
Oliveira, M. de (2001). “A trajetória do discurso ambiental em Curitiba (1960–2000),” Revista
de Sociología e Politica, 16, pp. 97–106.
Rabinovitch, J. and J. Leitmann (1996). “Urban planning in Curitiba, a Brazilian city challenges
conventional wisdom and relies on low technology to improve the quality of
urban life,” Scientific American, 274, pp. 26–49.
Ranhagen, U. and S. Trobeck (1998). Physical planning and sustainable urban transport—
a comparative analysis of four international cities, Swedish International Development
Agency, Stockholm.
Santoro, R. and J. Leitmann (2004). “Innovative urban transport in Curitiba, Brazil,” in
T. Campbell and H. Fuhr (eds), Leadership and innovation in subnational government.
Case studies from Latin America, World Bank Institute, Washington, DC.
Tlayle, L. and D. Biller (1994). Successful environmental institutions: lessons from Colombia
and Brazil. Environmental unit dissemination notes, World Bank, Washington, DC.
146 Crucibles of learning
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
8 Corporate styles: Bilbao, Seattle and others
If informal learning is somewhat ad hoc, technical, and largely in-house, corporate
learning is characterized by more formalized arrangements, including a bureaucracy,
written procedures for rule-making, and less flexible means of decision
making and action. And yet corporate systems of learning can have many partners
outside the core structure, just as informal or technical learning in Turin or Curitiba
receive strong contributions from business and commercial partners. The key idea
in corporate learning is not the prevalence or absence of the business community
or outside partners, but the formality of the structure that sets goals and guides
learning.
This chapter will examine features of corporate-style learning as practiced
in Bilbao, Seattle and other cities, including in various aspects Tampere, Finland
and Singapore. Bilbao and Seattle are the focus of discussion because a corporate
approach was the modality involved in one of them, Bilbao, in achieving utter
self-reinvention. The Seattle case is interesting because learning in that city has
evolved from an informal to a corporate style. The argument is not that a
corporate approach to learning was inevitable in Seattle or that it constituted the
cause of Bilbao’s reinvention. Rather, it was a tool for change adopted in both
cities for specific reasons.
In all cases, the features of corporate learning are very much like the features
of governance. In fact, for the most part, the governance apparatus for planning
and delivering services are nearly the same as governance itself. The main
difference in the cases covered in this chapter is that we focus on learning and
knowledge as a dimension of governance. Let’s start with Bilbao.
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
The case of Bilbao, Spain
Bilbao (population 1.3 million) is the capital of the Basque region in the northwestern
quadrant of Spain. The city’s story is a textbook example of a community
that perceived and reacted successfully to a pending economic crisis and then
created an executive agency and decision-making council to reshape the city.
Through the creation of a public–private think and action group called Bilbao
Metropoli-30 (BM-30), the city-region devised and implemented a long-term
strategy of learning that fed its appetite for transformation. BM-30 is a prime
example of a formalized learning institution. I call the style “corporate” because
it involves a well-defined structure; broad representation of public, private and
civic groups; formalized decision making; and written rules.
Though it is only one of numerous important players in Bilbao’s transformation,
more than any another BM-30 adopted a learning approach and sought
to acquire and apply global knowledge to alter its economic base. The transformation
also increased environmental quality and elevated its status in the regional
economy. The literature is filled with critical views that point to the polarizing
effects of Bilbao-style regeneration projects. But little of the commentary recognizes
the social capital outcomes of learning. To top it off, the city now sees itself
as a global source of knowledge and a center of learning about city management.
The story of Bilbao begins with cluster of shocks: the oil shock of the early
1970s, rising unemployment that reached 25 percent by the mid-1980s, the
flooding of the old town in 1983, shifting fortunes for the city-region as Europe
began to integrate. The onset of the European Community (Spain joined in 1986)
would signal a stark deterioration of the city’s economic base. For decades Bilbao
had been a steel-producing and shipbuilding center, relying on nearby deposits
of iron ore. The city’s position on the Nervion River favored the building and
export of small and medium vessels. Steel and shipbuilding would continue to
lose their competitive edge with the reduction in trade barriers that was coming
with the EU. By their own assessment (university and Chamber of Commerce
estimates) Bilbao would continue to lose jobs numbering in the thousands in
shipbuilding alone. Analysis showed that the city’s demographic profile was
strongly impacted by the decline of its main industries. Besides out-migration,
internally the city was seeing a reshaping of its residential areas. The region’s
competitive position would continue to erode over the coming decades (Ploger
2007).
City leadership, elected officials and business community began to lay plans
for a new Bilbao. In 1989, civic leaders launched many rounds of consultation to
explore a new strategy and, in keeping with the autonomous spirit of the Basque
region, they also laid groundwork for organizational arrangements to implement
148 Crucibles of learning
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
the plan. In 1990, the city launched Bilbao Metropoli-30, a public–private, nonprofit
association charged with planning, research and promotion of projects. A
group of 19 founding members was drawn from across a broad spectrum of
entities in the region, including cities, banks, businesses, universities, publishers,
utilities, the port, railroad, and others. The mission of Metropoli-30 was to carry
out the revitalization of metropolitan Bilbao.
After long deliberation—a process that involved hundreds of community and
regional meetings, together with international learning seminars staged in the
city, technical studies and strategy meetings—the association arrived at ambitious
and far-reaching conclusions: the future economy of Bilbao would center on the
creative arts, information and culture, and learning institutions. This was a radical
departure from its historical role as an industrial and shipping center—and some
thought a stretch too far for a city whose employment base was poorly suited to
knowledge-centric services.
The first major step was the formation of an assembly of stakeholders. The
Assembly became a formal institution with appointed leadership and by-laws,
and by 1991 it had published its first major product, a general plan also known
as Metropoli-30. Funds from Spain and the EU helped to finance the diagnostic
and analytical groundwork for the plan.
Internal and external learning
The learning process in Bilbao took place on many levels. Two major forms are
noted here. First is the internal process characterized by self-recognition and
awareness, starting with the realization that Europe’s transformation was leading
to drastic economic decline for the city. Many of the agencies and institutions
were already aware that their fates were tied to one another. The formation of
Metropoli-30 gave them the opportunity to explore and confirm these views.
A second process of learning helped to sustain the continuity of action and
conviction. Many learning events—meaning the staging of high-profile speakers,
conferences, seminars and roundtables—were held in public in the run-up to the
Revitalization Plan, which was published in 1992. These were widely publicized
and well attended. They helped to build a community consciousness about the
mission of the city and to widen community understanding about the range of
possibilities for the city’s future.
Corporate styles 149
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
The learning process became the hallmark of BM-30. Between 1990 and 2005
more that 40 seminars were held in the city on many topics of urbanism. The
events featured world-class thought leaders, authors, academics and practitioners
from Europe and elsewhere. Meanwhile, various city leaders were aware of
developments in other cities, particularly the transformations being made in
Baltimore, Pittsburgh and Glasgow. The key lesson for Bilbao’s leadership was
the confirmation of the very idea that transformation was possible.1
This heartening message helped to drive Bilbao’s leaders to take a major
gamble on the Guggenheim Museum. The museum was to become the flagship
project for BM-30, but in the beginning both sides were anxious. Originally
Guggenheim had aimed for a higher-status city, with Vienna a favorite candidate.
When Bilbao sent an emissary to make its case, the idea was rebuffed. Later,
many remarked that the commitment fee charged by architect Frank Ghery even
to consider the site was thought to be exorbitant. But by the mid-1990s, with
no suitor at hand, Guggenheim revisited other options. With the help of the
European Union, Bilbao mobilized resources to meet the financial requirements
of the new museum.
Bilbao’s core leadership, Ria 2000 (the executive and implementing arm of the
corporate arrangements in Bilbao), the city, the province, and BM-30 were aware
that, had the proposition been subjected to a vote, the population would not
150 Crucibles of learning
Box 8.1 Timeline for Bilbao
• 1986 Spain joins the European Community
• 1989 Formation of Assembly
• 1991 Creation of Metropoli-30
• 1992 Revitalization Plan
• 1993 Bilbao Ria 2000
• External Port
• Abandoibarra, footbridges, Ribera Park
• 1995 Metro System inaugurated
• 1997 Guggenheim Museum
• 1999 Bilbao 2010: The Strategy
• 2000 Airport
• 1990–2005 More than 40 seminars from world-class thought leaders
• 2006 World Forum on Values for City Development
• 2008 European Institute for City Development
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
have approved. The former chief architect of the municipal government, Ibon
Areso, recalled that the strategy was to project the idea as an investment in culture
rather than expense on a large new project. The accounting firm KPMG calculated
that the museum would have to attract 400,000 visitors per year in order to break
even financially. The city and province took a big gamble that paid off. Plenty of
critical views are still heard about the museum, splendid as it may be, plunked
down as if it were an alien spaceship on the banks of the Nervión River. On the
other hand, the financial gamble paid off handsomely. The museum is credited
with attracting three times the previous level of tourists in the first year.
Following the Guggenheim came nearly a dozen other major projects in
and around Bilbao, but mostly focused on the reclaimed waterway, the former
site of derelict shipyards and warehouses. In their place were built attractive
esplanades, pedestrian malls, a graceful footbridge and other amenities.
World-class architects were retained to design the new airport, metro system,
convention center and other public buildings along the Nervión River. In addition,
the regional transportation system was upgraded and major improvements were
made in university and educational institutions. A decade later, tourism had blossomed
in Bilbao. Hotel usage doubled and air travel tripled between 1994 and
2002.
An important part of Bilbao’s success is that the city mobilized resources and
support from many quarters. The central executive actor was Ria 2000, the agency
commissioned to implement Bilbao’s strategic plan. Even the considerable economic
and financial muscle of the city and of the Basque community would not
have been sufficient to achieve Bilbao’s transformation. The European Union
provided both grant and credit finance. Also, the city brought a large number of
organizations and agencies within the Basque region to support its efforts. More
than 40 institutions and agencies have subscribed to Metropoli-30, and this organization
itself represents a significant achievement.
Corporate styles 151
Box 8.2 Bilbao Metropoli-30 vision setting
Bilbao Metropoli-30 regularly takes part in conferences, organizations and
networks worldwide. Specifically, the association collaborates with the
Urban Forum Network, International Institute of Administrative Sciences
(IIAS), Standing Committee on Urban and Regional Statistics (SCORUS), part
of the International Statistical Institute (ISI), the System Dynamics Society,
the World Future Society, the International Network for Marketing and
Urban Development and the Global Business Network (GBN).
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
Academic and policy literature has focused on many issues that arise from
downtown revitalization and urban restructuring, particularly at the hands of
city-regions practicing “entrepreneurial urbanism.” As cities begin to enter into
a developmental mode at a regional level, large projects involving wholesale
reformulation of urban fabric inevitably have polarizing effects for local populations
because of physical or cultural displacement. Yet only a small handful of
the scores of articles written about Bilbao pay any attention to the collective
learning and the formation of social capital in this process. Etxebarria Kerexeta
notes that the “intense participation in strategic conversations between firms
and the rest of the players from civil society has decisively contributed to creating
high returns from the social formation” (Etxebarria Kerexeta and Franco
Ibarzabal, 2003).
BM-30 today
In contrast to the executive role of Ria 2000, BM-30 takes the long-view, visionary
and deliberative role. The website lists a running total of 64 workshops and
another 50 or so forums, conferences and courses of various types covering urban
topics and including urban management. Each year Metropoli-30, with others,
organizes or co-sponsors investigative conferences, learning events, workshops
and seminars. Increasingly, Bilbao collaborates with cities in other countries
including China, Colombia, Denmark, France, Japan, Mexico, the US and the UK,
to name only those involved in learning events during 2009. Singapore has
represented another turning point in Bilbao’s emerging vision of itself as a leading
knowledge city.
Recent programs, such as OPENCities, aim specifically to pair Bilbao with
European counterparts, in pursuit of specific objectives. Participating cities include
152 Crucibles of learning
In 1999, a decade after the Strategic Revitalization Plan, the association,
with the participation of its members and further support from 20 international
experts, launched a study of advanced international models of urban
strategy development. The conclusion of “Bilbao 2010” is that success lies
in ideas and values, which set the strategy for the future of metropolitan
Bilbao. It is a city capable of identifying, attracting and materializing good
ideas to benefit the whole community.
Source: Taken from presentation by Director
General, Bilbao Metropoli-30 (Cearra, 2005)
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
Belfast, Dublin, Dusseldorf, Madrid, Sofia and Vienna. Subsequent phases of the
project will bring in Bucharest, Mitra, Poznan and others, along with consultants
to develop management indicators.
These and other initiatives (Cities of the Future, for instance, also sponsored
by the British Council (Clark, 2008)) are filling out Bilbao’s vision of a knowledgecentric
urban place. Bilbao is becoming a source of experience and practice. In
many cases it acts as the teacher in urban management.
Above all, the lesson from Bilbao is that the city created an entirely new
element—a conscientious agency, Metropoli-30—in the city and regional political
structure. The key factor is that the structure involved a cerebral function for the
city, one that was deliberate in design and concerned itself with the role of knowledge
in its long-term development. This collaborative instrument was a significant,
possibly indispensable, tool for the city to grow and thrive.
Seattle
In an earlier paper, I categorized Seattle as an “informal” learning system based
mainly on the unofficial, though highly organized operation of the Trade
Development Alliance of Greater Seattle (Campbell, 2009). Since 2004, I would
reclassify Seattle in the corporate category because of the formation of the Puget
Sound Regional Partnership (PSRP). In effect, Seattle has evolved a step further.
Building on a long record of study missions, in fact as a direct outgrowth of several
of them, the PSRP was created to be a forward-planning agency very similar in
structure and mission to Metropoli-30 in Bilbao. The main difference is that the
PSRP has a very strong research and internal knowledge-generation component.
Seattle’s two decades of study missions helped pave the way for a regional
institution like the PSRP. Recall from Chapter 4 that Seattle began its study tour
program in 1992 with a visit by a small delegation to several European cities.
Continuous and repeated visits over nearly two decades have created not just a
leadership elite in the city, but also a moving dialogue about issues of common
concern. Collective processing of central themes created a mindset in which the
collective leadership began to see eye to eye on the need for a supra-local entity
that would fill the gaps in data, management and vision that had been left in
the breach among the individual jurisdictions and organizations below the level
of the state.2
One theme, “process paralysis,” has been a familiar one in Seattle’s extensively
participatory culture. The topic came to the surface during the visit to Shanghai,
and it had arisen a year earlier in Barcelona. A large contingent of Seattleites took
part in both visits. The Seattle delegates were struck by the consensus style of
Corporate styles 153
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
decision making by the leadership elites of Barcelona, a group drawn from all
points on the political spectrum, ranging from socialists, organized civil society,
conservative business, and political groups from all parties. Barcelona’s emphasis
on consensus is founded in part on a strong Catalan identity, reinforced by a
history of open hostility toward Catalonia by the Franco government.
The impact of these observations on the leadership elites of Seattle triggered
a retreat-style meeting at which the assembled group, again drawn from the city,
the county, NGOs, the business community, and specialized agencies like the ports,
agreed to form a working group to “get their arms around coordination issues.”
A year later, the PSRP was legally formed, with representation from key elements
in government and business, and began laying the plans for economic options
and infrastructure needs for Seattle over the long term. The legal formation of
the group and pledges to it, including pledges in capital from private industry,
were announced at the Munich study tour in 2004.
Many participants I spoke with referred to benefits that endured long after
a study tour; for example, when telephoning a government agency or business,
and having that shared experience, knowing the face of the “person on the other
end of the call.” All of this facilitates understanding and the speed of doing
business.
Seattle’s record of moving together, despite the paralysis, is built in part on
its own set of shared values and identity. Some of this is the product of the study
missions and all the related Chamber of Commerce and trade engagements that
are formed in the city. President of the TDA Bill Stafford feels that the positive
reputation of Greater Seattle for working more smoothly than other regions is
due in part to good coordination with the public and private sectors and a
cohesiveness of view over the long term.
That conclusion was given strong support from the results of a survey of more
than 50 of some 350 study-tour veterans. The data showed that a very high
proportion agreed that the size and strength of their personal networks had
increased as a result of the study missions. These opinions were more moderate
when it came to working with people across municipal boundaries, i.e., jurisdictions
and places outside Seattle proper. Three-quarters of the respondents agreed
or strongly agreed that they were put in closer touch with people in different
sectors within Seattle.
Similarly, strong agreement was expressed by respondents about ease of
contact and quality research (Table 8.1). These findings suggest that the bonding
objectives of the missions are not only being met but that they are paying off with
trusting relationships that facilitate quality information flow in the community.
The missions’ success is also demonstrated by the high numbers and repeat
visits of private sector participants—in effect, meeting a market test of the value
154 Crucibles of learning
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
proposition of study tours. Further, the missions open rich insights for participants
and appear to facilitate high-quality information flow and personal or professional
change after mission experiences. The findings also suggest that the study
missions are building on their own success, and that they represent a product that
is consistently reliable.
More than half the survey respondents said they knew about half or more of
the participants on the study missions in which they took part; a little more than
43 percent said that participants on their mission were “mostly new.” This finding
suggests that mission participants are already bonded to some extent and it may
reflect the fact that many participants have been on multiple missions (averaging
more than five). In any case, most participants start the mission with a degree of
familiarity.
Corporate styles 155
Table 8.1 Network exchange
Follow up with Strongly Disagree Neutral Agree Strongly
study tour participants disagree agree
Easier to call on someone 0 2 7 6 15
I did not know before
Greater likelihood that I 0 0 5 9 15
will get good answers
Greatly increase my ability 0 1 4 7 18
to get information
Box 8.3 A mini-case of idea penetration
Mayor Greg Nickels became a national figure when he pledged to bring the
city to the Kyoto standard for greenhouse gases. Not known for his disposition
to adopt international standards as a guide to anything, Nickels was
converted to shades of green by pragmatism and a long history of conservation
and environmentalism in Seattle, starting with the electricity
conservation program of Seattle City Light in 1977.
But Nickels began to become more attuned to the value of sustainable
design when he learned of the reduced snow pack in the Cascade
Mountains. About this time, Nickels met with Gordon Price, former councilor
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
Tampere
The learning style in Tampere, whose population is under 300,000, has grown out
of a series of deliberate steps sprinkled with opportunism and luck. While the
city does not operate with the formal features of Bilbao or Seattle—particularly
in written conventions and rules—the cohesive deliberation with which city
leaders undertook their knowledge gathering and strategic organization could
make it a candidate for a corporate model. Over the four decades between 1960
and 2000, Tampere’s economy was transformed from reliance on industry, with
33,000 industrial jobs, to become a knowledge economy with 25,000 students.
Today Tampere is one of the foremost knowledge-based cities in Northern Europe.
The Tampere case is one of learning to adapt to global influences through tactical
and strategic management of global forces and local resources.
During the process, Tampere saw its textile industry decline. But the engineering
talent embedded within it and other industries became one of the pillars
supporting knowledge-intensive clusters. Tampere was wise to make good use
of its engineering talent. The city won the relocation of national universities,
and these in turn helped to attract Nokia and other high-tech firms. But steering
156 Crucibles of learning
for the City of Vancouver, and Nickels and his staff grew increasingly
interested in Vancouver’s densification downtown. Gordon claimed that
the developmental trend not only produced a high-quality urban environment
but reduced traffic by 13 percent. Visiting the city, Nickels was sold
on the idea. He made a presentation to the Chamber of Commerce. Already
a player in city-to-city learning, the Chamber helped forge a public–private
linkage with a new mayor.
The greening trend picked up steam when Nickels asked the city’s
chief planner, Dianne Sugimura, to inject “green” into the building code.
Sugimura targeted key players in real estate development for lunchtime
briefings. She found that she was singing to the chorus. Developers were
already oriented to the same green parameters; dozens of buildings and
facilities in Seattle had been certified by LEED (Leadership in Energy and
Environmental Design).3 When the plan was presented to the council, key
private sector developers were there to endorse LEED-certified building
codes. The plan sailed through to adoption.
The repeated exposure to outside ideas and the internal circulation in
city dialogue—public and private, formal and informal—had paved the way
toward speedy understanding of green innovations in the building code.
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
the process and managing international competitive forces required increasing
degrees of coherence and skill on the part of public and private sectors.
During the mid-1990s, this skill was expressed mainly in terms of voluntary
cooperation among networks of firms, research organizations, universities, and
local and regional governments (Kostiainen and Sotarauta, 2003). The management
style then evolved into a development network based on increasingly close
ties, which managed to foster institutional entrepreneurship and regional innovation.
Tampere’s political and business communities effectively created informal
corporate governance.
As knowledge-intensive clusters began to form, the city, the universities, and
high-tech knowledge industries entered into mutually beneficial relationships
that grew in sophistication and brought about a corporate management style.
The network consisted of development agencies for economy, industry, innovation
and municipalities. Furthermore, the municipalities in surrounding Tampere
agreed on a coordinated strategy.
Though it lacks the same formalized, institutional personality of Metropoli-
30, and has never had a guiding assembly representing elected officials and their
respective jurisdictions (as formed both by Metropoli-30 and the PSRP in Seattle),
Tampere’s development network achieved a coordinated action plan that fostered
innovation in knowledge-based industries. Systemic and continuous policies
gradually formed a web-work of agencies and institutions that crisscrossed public,
private and civic boundaries. Kostiainen and Sotarauta’s graphic illustration is
reproduced in Figure 8.1.
Kostiainen and Sotarauta depict the building process in Tampere, Finland in
terms of knowledge creation with special reference to the ideas of Nonaka
(Kostiainen and Sotarauta, 2003). Recall that Nonaka and his collaborators
invoked the term ba, a place or space of learning, originally developed to describe
intra-organizational knowledge creation and innovation. Tampere is an example
that answers some of the questions posed earlier in the book about how a city
network, being a more or less tightly coupled policy structure in an urban region,
can achieve an environment of knowledge creation and innovation.
Over the past several decades, the direction of change began to merge with
the emphasis on knowledge regions. This tendency has had its most visible expression
in the EU’s Seventh Framework Programme. Today, networked institutions
in Tampere function as thought centers for research and development to feed
the growth of high-tech and knowledge-based industries in the region. Policies
and practices have created an operating environment that allows the city to act
on the global stage with adaptive capacity.
In Kostiainen’s view, the key feature in Tampere was a versatile group of
specialized developers, “each established with purposeful collaboration and
Corporate styles 157
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
Specialized
developers, e.g.
Finn-Medi Research Ltd,
Media Tampere Ltd,
Professia Ltd,
Tampere Technology
Centre Ltd
Research and
education institutes, e.g.
Tampere University of Technology,
University of Tampere,
Tampere Polytechnic,
VTT
Key companies, e.g.
Nokia, ICL Invia,
Bionx Implants,
Metso, Alma Media,
Kalmar Industries
State agencies, e.g.
Finnvera Plc,
Tampere Region Employment and
Economic Development Centre
Local and regional administration, e.g.
City of Tampere
Regional Council
Business associations, e.g.
Tampere Chamber of
Commerce,
Entrepreneurs’ Association of
Tampere Region
Figure 8.1 Tampere’s network of actors
Source: Kostiainen and Sotarauta, 2003
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
ownership as public bodies . . . most focused on a particularly strategic cluster”
(Kostiainen, 2002: 617). The city also formed CityWeb, which serves as a “loose
umbrella aiming to facilitate launching and carry out projects related to improving
preconditions of learning and enhancing of social capital.” The Board of the
Tampere Regional Centre of Expertise Programme and the Advisory Committee
induce dozens of representatives from companies and the public sector to take
part. The Centre of Expertise, in Sotarauta’s words, has “sought to induce innovation
by persuading, through conditioned resources, universities and firms to
work together and thus to strengthen the foundation for variation and increased
innovation activity” (Sotarauta and Srinivas, 2005). Though they have had mixed
results, the policy of induced coordination more or less approximates corporate
steering.
Summing up the corporate style
The spectrum of cases illustrates both common and different aspects of a corporate
style. First is the reason, or motivation, to learn. Bilbao’s leadership elite
foresaw a pending crash and mobilized broad-based support to take action and
avert a crisis. It succeeded by finding a feasible platform that reflected and in turn
shaped the common interests of key stakeholders. Seattle’s motivation was
similarly triggered by the recession in 1993 and layoffs by Boeing. But the purpose
of learning among Seattle elites was one of understanding competition.
A second common feature is that the corporate cases discussed in this
chapter, as well as others like Singapore’s Urban Redevelopment Authority, have
oversight boards and written rules of the game (though not elected representatives,
as in Bilbao) about their mission and decision making. Embedded in
different ways are learning units, for instance, the Trade Development Alliance
in Seattle and the International Group of the Urban Redevelopment Authority
in Singapore.
Seattle and Bilbao clear a threshold of effort that serves to deepen and
broaden institutional roots. All the corporate cases serve a wide geographical
territory made up of many political jurisdictions, but none of these benefit from
direct service provision by the entities we are discussing here. Instead, the corporate
functions consist mainly of establishing strategic direction alongside
gathering data, and setting rules for deliberation and decision making.
In Seattle, the initial configuration was for data gathering and research. It
later became benchmarking, and later still, with the PSRP, it became diagnosis,
long-term vision, and the means to make changes. Tampere followed a similar
trajectory, paying close attention to global cues of price and competition and
Corporate styles 159
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
then, using the network of agencies, suggesting tactical steps to achieve its own
vision of a high-tech, knowledge-intensive city.
The learning style in Bilbao and Seattle are mirror images of one another. Both
city organizations search out and husband learning; both have a formally designated
leadership structure; both have widespread representation from public,
private and civic sectors; both have a rule-making and decision-making function;
and both seek to help integrate different segments and stakeholders in their
respective regions. It is notable also that each city has joined forces, along with
another dozen cities, to collaborate on establishing benchmark data. Tampere
differs in several ways. Both research and intelligence functions are diffused
among its constituent parts and Tampere has no elected members in its deliberative
body.
There is little doubt that informal circles of thinkers and practitioners, businesses
and academics did much to process the new ideas in Bilbao, Seattle and
Tampere. But the cases are fundamentally different from those relying exclusively
on informal and technical learners because there was a decision-making structure
that staged learning, ratified lessons, and followed a recognized procedure. The
corporate systems have an overlay that guides and moderates the process. In the
case of Bilbao, this was needed to keep all stakeholders not only on the same
page but in the same book. Some elements in the Bilbao region (Basque Country)
might easily have diverted or slowed the modernization project, or worse. On the
other hand, the institutional system of invention and agreement for city growth
produced in Bilbao a solid foundation for graduating to next steps that are not
so clearly evident in Tampere or Seattle.
Seattle’s city-regional structure evolved to a corporate one with the formation
of the Puget Sound Regional Partnership, which built on the successes of the Trade
Development Alliance. This is not to say that the TDA will melt away. On the
contrary, it will in all likelihood continue to be the learning and innovation center
in Seattle, working in tandem with the PSRP—but increasingly the applications
of learning in policy and investment will most likely be lodged in the PSRP.
Notes
1 Personal communication, Ibon Areso, a key figure in Bilbao’s transformation.
2 The Trade Development Alliance has also helped purely trade development missions,
separate from its study-tour mandate. The TDA organized 26 outbound missions in its
10 years of operation and assisted in the development of 14 others.
3 Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) is an internationally recognized
certification system created by the United States Green Building Council, which is a
160 Crucibles of learning
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
non-profit community of industry leaders working to make green buildings available
to everyone in the US, within a generation.
References
Campbell, T. (2009). “Learning cities. Knowledge, capacity and competitiveness,” Habitat
International, 33, pp. 195–201.
Cearra, A. M. (2005). “Governance and city competitiveness: the role of metropolitan
economic development agencies” (presentation), OECD International Conference on
City Competitiveness, March 3–4, Santa Cruz, Tenerife, Spain.
Clark, G. (2008). “Cities of the future,” in British Council (ed.), The city of the future, British
Council, Madrid.
Etxebarria Kerexeta, G. and H. Franco Ibarzabal (2003). “Reflections on urban revitalisation
strategies in old industrial regions. The case of Bilbao,” European Association for
Evolutionary Political Economy. 2003 Annual Conference, Maastricht, The Netherlands.
Kostiainen, J. (2002). “Learning and the ‘ba’ in the development network of an urban
region,” European Planning Studies, 10, pp. 613–631.
Kostiainen, J. and M. Sotarauta (2003). “Great leap or long march to knowledge economy:
institutions, actors and resources in the development of Tampere,” European Planning
Studies, 11, pp. 415–438.
Ploger, J. (2007). Bilbao city report, CASE repor 43, Centre for the Analysis of Social Exclusion,
London School of Economics, London.
Sotarauta, M. and S. Srinivas (2005). “Co-evolutionary policy processes: understanding
innovative economies and future resilience,” Futures, 38, pp. 312–326.
Corporate styles 161
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
9 Clouds of trust in style
Each of the previous three chapters describes a style of learning that can be found
in many cities. And though the informal style is the most common, often elements
of many styles operate in parallel with other modes of learning. Most of all, we
have seen that learning depends to some degree on an underlying quality about
relationships among those engaged in some major city project, its plans, developments
and major events. Although each learning style has its stronger and weaker
points, there is something more to the secret of the innovative milieu. This chapter
will dive a little deeper into the clouds of trust introduced in Chapter 6 and explore
how internal learning—and particularly the atmospheric chemistry of social relations—
interacts with the external world of knowledge acquisition, taking Turin,
Portland and Charlotte as examples. Let’s begin with a review of how learning
got started in these places.
Origins of style
The cities started at different times and took quite different routes to success.
Recall that Turin accomplished a wholesale turnaround in its political life, impelled
by the momentum of the national decentralization policy coupled with strong
support for reform at the local level. One pair of authors call Turin the most
innovative of the cities covered in a recent study of urban change in Italy (Dente
and Coletti, 2009).
Portland established a landmark growth boundary in the 1970s and became
a bellwether for US cities by shunning additional freeways in favor of light rail
and later in its evolution establishing a growth boundary and emphasizing biking
and walking in urban transit. Charlotte also has made wholesale changes in
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
city-center urban form, complemented by light rail and improved bus transit,
attention to neighborhood relations, and efforts to resolve social tensions.
Charlotte is also more deliberately engaged in the search for future leaders than
any of the other cities covered in this book.
Note should be taken that these cities started at quite different historical
points in their respective experiences of political, socio-economic and urban
evolution, in the sense that each started with a fresh break from the past. Portland
is the most advanced in modern strategic planning. It started with a new land
use law in 1973. Charlotte launched wholesale reform of its downtown area in
the 1970s. These initiatives put the two cities a decade or more ahead in the
modern phase of strategic planning in comparison to the other cases discussed
here.
Charlotte’s single-minded drive toward modernizing its downtown was guided
at first by the 1966 Odell plan, an effort that was later modified to create an urban
center suited to the city’s ambition to become a global leader in the finance sector.
This drive ultimately led to major changes in urban form, but the wider and
longer-term impacts of changes in Charlotte’s land use, transit and social issues
came decades later as logical sequels of the Odell plan rather than premeditated
elements.
Turin has experienced the most recent clear break from the past. In 1993, the
national government promulgated decentralization (in elections, and later in
finance and decision making), triggering a political sea-change in participatory
governance in Turin that paved the way for its two strategic plans and a successful
Olympic Games in 2006.
Clouds of trust
Actors in open urban systems take part in collective learning, even when no
explicit, formal arrangements govern the system. Further, trust and value sharing,
seen in many doing academic work, have played an important role in the case
material in earlier chapters. How is an innovative milieu—the soft infrastructure,
or Nonaka’s ba—formed in a creative city?
The cases have shown that many interconnections link individuals and their trust
networks in each city. We note that all three proactive reformers for which we have
detailed network data are categorized as informal. We have yet to gather data on
cities that do not fit the reformer category.1 Still, we can learn something from the
evidence we do have and make some educated guesses about the non-reformers.
The extent to which the informants were linked to one another gives some
crude snapshot of the environment of trust for that particular time, in that
Clouds of trust in style 163
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
particular domain of planning work. But it is important to note that we are limited
in the extent to which we can compare the three cities. Turin and Charlotte are
most alike in that the persons interviewed in these cities were members of a
well-defined group of activists taking part in a common endeavor at about the
same time. The case of Portland is different. There, the network data intentionally
sampled a number of distinct groups, who were taking part in activities with
differing objectives. The aim in Portland was to examine the extent to which the
various domains had interconnecting bridges among them.
The role of informal networks
With these distinctions in mind, what can we say about environments of trust?
In each case, interviews revealed instances in which internal networks processed,
discussed and absorbed new knowledge and lessons from other cities. For
instance, bicycle use in Amsterdam excited the biking enthusiasts in Portland
and fueled their inputs into their own city’s planning. Light rail seen in Denver
and Portland filtered into many discussions held by the leading figures in
Charlotte’s planning. Similarly, Turin learned from cities like Glasgow and
Barcelona and debated openly the specifics of local economic development and
strategic planning processes. These instances are not the only knowledge brought
into the respective cities, and perhaps not the most important. But in each
instance, outside lessons were clearly identifiable reference points brought into
the discussion and debate by interviewees as they reflected on their own networks
of trust.
The graphics from Chapter 6 are a sample from a small subset of actors in the
respective civic processes in each of these cities. But in each case the cities went
to lengths to tap into sentiment across a broad spectrum of social groupings in
the community. For instance, Portland and Charlotte had a deliberate practice
of mobilizing many clearly delineated but overlapping interest groups. Over time
in Portland, park and open space supporters forged ties and alliances with cyclists,
urban trails advocates, and public transit enthusiasts and have either been invited
or have otherwise made their way into the city’s decision-making circles.
Charlotte was somewhat more deliberate about assembling networks, beginning
with “The Group,” formed with reference to a similar arrangement its
members had observed in Pittsburgh. The Group expanded and for several
decades was a central actor in plotting Charlotte’s future. With retirements and
the rapidly changing financial sector in recent years, Charlotte is now developing
a new generation of leaders.
164 Crucibles of learning
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
Features of informal clouds
Although the city clouds resemble one another in general form, each city presents
a distinct overall pattern. And because of the small sample size, they cannot be
compared in any strict sense. On the whole, Turin and Charlotte are both rather
tightly knit. They differ very little in arithmetic indicators that measure networks,
for instance overall density and average distance (Table 9.1). Density refers to
the number of connections present as a proportion of the total connections
possible, the range of which is 8.5 percent in the case of Charlotte and 10.5 percent
in the case of Turin. Average distance between any two ties is also small, less
than a half a tie, 3.57 vs 3.98.
What do these figures mean in practice? Let’s take Profumo, the University
Rector in Turin. He would be less than four links away, on average, from any of
the more than 100 people named in the Turin network. Average distance, for
instance 4.43 in Portland, means that, taking all linkages into account, any
member of the network is a little more than four links away from any other.
Diameter, another reflection of coherence, is the number of nodes across the
entire graph. In short, one might say that the informal network in Turin is tight,
and that of the other cities less so.
Several other features of the networks bear scrutiny: the power positions
and the isolates. In all the cases, several people were named repeatedly. They
are what social network analysts call “power nodes,” because these persons
gather information from many sources and can exercise discretion about when,
with whom, and how to divulge what they know (Borgatti et al., 2002). They
may also be latent leaders. Network members interviewed for this study did not
always recognize the degree to which popular figures were interconnected with
one another, nor did interviewees always recognize the extent to which specific
individuals had the trust of their peers, or conversely were isolated, sometimes
completely, from their peers. The discovery of this information proved to be
surprising for many of the interviewees.
For example, in Turin, though the current mayor is an obvious and wellrecognized
political leader in the community, the most frequently named trusted
Clouds of trust in style 165
Table 9.1 Coherence measures
City Density Av. distance Diameter
Portland 0.085 4.432 8.000
Charlotte 0.085 3.976 6.000
Turin 0.105 3.569 6.000
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
166 Crucibles of learning
Charlotte
Portland
Turin
Figure 9.1 Graphic
representation of informal
networks
Key: red circles = interviewees;
blue squares = trusted others
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
persons were not in the public sector at all. That prize went to people in the
business and academic communities. Charlotte offers a different picture. That city
is going through a serious transition in its leadership. The older “benevolent
dictators” have passed, and trust is directed most often toward the CEO of a major
foundation.
As for isolated characters (good examples are the two circles in the lower right
of Charlotte in Figure 9.1), these represent interviewees whose references coincided
with no one named by any of the others interviewed and to whom no other
interviewee made reference. These may merely be the anomalies of a small sample,
but they nonetheless illustrate a real concern because they are like sink holes
in a community of trust.
Other findings relate both to the growth of new edges and the durability of
networks of trust. Data in Portland and Turin showed clearly how new members
not previously linked to traditional power elites were inducted or welcomed
into established networks during the planning process. A common theme heard
in the speech of young persons interviewed in Portland—“it’s not done yet,” “you
get heard”—reflected an openness to young people and new ideas. Participants
involved in strategic planning in Turin found the new openings created by Mayor
Castellani both unexpected and unprecedented. Several interviewees explained
that they had not anticipated being a part of the deliberative efforts in strategic
planning in Turin, since they were not connected to “the right family,” the “right
industry” or the right “social patron.”
Looking a level deeper
We can weed out many of the connections shown in the city clouds and drill down
to connections only among those interviewed. The rationale for doing this is that
the lists of trusted others provided by the interviewees contain no information
about whether any of the trust avowed by an interviewee is reciprocated by the
other. Looking specifically at the reciprocal directions of trust tells us a little more
about the trust value of the cloud. Figure 9.2 illustrates these mutual trust ties.
Here, a somewhat different character emerges from what we might call the
internal part of the clouds. Turin’s internal cloud is composed of five individuals
(each with four or more ties, and a density of 0.1838—see Table 9.2). These individuals
are clearly leaders, operating in the core. For Portland, core individuals
are named less often than in Turin, reflecting the wider sample that we saw in
the complete cloud (density 15.7). In other words, the inner core of trust in
Portland is more spread out. At the same time, both Turin and Portland have
one isolated character not included as a part of anyone’s trust group.
Clouds of trust in style 167
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
Turin Portland
Charlotte
Figure 9.2 Reciprocal ties of trust in city clouds
Key: blue = interviewees; isolated blue squares = no reciprocal relationships with others in the cloud of trust
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
Though Portland is not the least dense of the three sampled networks, the
overall structure (especially diameter) connects a wide range of subgroups, about
a dozen of them surrounding the perimeter of Portland’s “core.” Peripheral
groupings could all be considered something akin to Granovetter’s loose ties
(Granovetter, 1973), in the sense that they are not directly connected to many
others elsewhere in the network. These small clusters represent sources of ideas
that are likely to be different from the consensus ideas that are manufactured
and circulated in the core.
Granovetter theorized that loose ties of roughly this kind are “bridges” to
sources of fresh and out-of-the-box thinking. In contrast, strong ties, bonds of
family and close friends (ties that also entail reciprocal obligation), are less likely
to provide new or fresh information. Strong ties therefore offer less chance of a
bridge to new resource connections. Loose ties in Portland’s case might mean that
it has more access to that key idea from out of the blue that just might solve the
problem at hand.
Conversely, the comparative advantage of tighter coherence in Turin would
be the speedy transfer of ideas between and among members in the network,
perhaps with the fillip of being able to reach a consensus more quickly. But though
they are fast and coherent, Charlotte and Turin might not have the range of
options that Portland could develop with its links into many peripheral interest
groups. Charlotte falls somewhere in between these “extremes,” with a distance
equivalent to Portland but a tighter overall grouping.
In short, the internal networks of the three cities offer insight into many
aspects of processing and exchanging planning information. Tight networks offer
some advantages, e.g., speed of circulation, which is the obverse to the advantages
of loose networks, e.g., access to a variety of ideas. Arguments can be made
about how each can serve the planning process. One area of interest is whether
a few adjustments in key linkages within a network would be sufficient to increase
both speed and diversity, an idea that has been raised by some scholars (Lazer
and Friedman, 2007). Also, data of this kind offer insight into possibly “hidden”
leaders or information power centers. Another story emerging from this analysis
is about the openness and growth of networks, a point that is of potential
Clouds of trust in style 169
Table 9.2 Cohesiveness measures in three city clouds
Charlotte Turin Portland
Density 14.6 18.4 15.7
Distance 2.4 2.4 2.3
Compactness 0.38 0.36 0.33
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
importance in meeting new challenges posed by groups of foreign and immigrant
talent taking up new positions in cities.
Forming a “ba”
The cases suggest that new knowledge in general, and being proactive in
acquiring new knowledge in particular, are associated with successful outcomes
in terms of urban transformation. Learning appears to be both acquired for
purposes of, and associated with improvements that enhance, competitiveness,
at least in the eyes of interviewees. It remains to be shown whether this association
can be demonstrated with more objective rigor.
The questions posed here, and the data generated, suggest a new window
of inquiry in urban development. The findings also suggest that external and
internal learning constitute a kind of soft infrastructure and are intricately
involved in transformations. To the extent that this is true, city and national policy
may wish to look more favorably on learning and seek to facilitate the process
rather than treat it with indifference, as is the case in some cities.
More evidence is needed at both macro and micro levels to establish more
clearly the importance of external knowledge gathering as opposed to other
forms of learning and to map out the translation of new knowledge in competitiveness.
For one thing, further observation will help to understand the
processes of absorption and adaptation and may have useful insights in terms of
the speed and coherence of city development policy. Further analysis along these
lines would also help to establish the overall scope of exchange currently ongoing,
to document the scale of demand as well as the costs and benefits of this and
other, complementary or competitive, forms of learning.
The findings also suggest that informal trust networks may be a useful indicator
of soft infrastructure, although much additional work is needed to clarify
and understand these ideas. The tools of social network analysis promise both to
describe and quantitatively to measure variables of connectivity and trust in a
way that can be compared both over time and across space. One area of work
that could be researched further relates to the fact that cities achieve knowledge
processing by different routes, perhaps trading off speed of reaching consensus
against richness and diversity in potential solutions.
A second area of interest, one that concerns many cities coping with the
management of global talent, is that of attracting new social capital or managing
the stocks already in town. The three cases here have shown quite distinct
styles of incorporating new blood into informal planning networks, somewhat
aligned with the styles of diversity and speed, discussed earlier. The findings also
170 Crucibles of learning
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
suggest that the shape of networks may matter as much if not more than their
size.
The analysis of these case cities has attempted to reveal the tissue and features
of a city’s ba. The networks tell us part of the story; leadership and participation
another part; the learning style itself yet another.
Learning from abroad
Fluid social relationships internal to the city form the glue of ba. What about the
knowledge, the second aspect of milieu? Right off the bat, it’s useful to recall
that all the cities exhibited most of the characteristics of “proactive reformer cities”
mentioned earlier. Proactive reformers are deliberate in having learning strategies,
they sustain an effort to acquire and store knowledge, they are committed
to allocating substantial public resources for learning, and they believe in building
capacity to manage knowledge. Though wide variations can be seen in the degree
of use and importance accorded to one mechanism or the other, both fluid social
relationships and knowledge were amply evident in each of the cases.
Clouds of trust in style 171
Box 9.1 Barcelona mini-case
Barcelona is often cited as a benchmark for achieving innovative reform.
Catalonia, the region of which Barcelona is the capital, moved most quickly
of all the Spanish regions after the 1975 death of Franco to strengthen
regional identity and political autonomy. The city then stood at the center
of a political renaissance in Catalonia.
Barcelona has benefited from many resources for learning not readily
available to the other cities considered in this analysis. Barcelona’s early
(1980s) drive to establish a regional identity, then to bid for and hold the
Olympic Games, and form a metropolitan organization all benefited from
extensive exchange. For instance, the Barcelona Metropolitan authority
(now defunct) organized many targeted visits, among them trips to Warsaw
to study labor relations, Helsinki for health and education, and Stockholm
for waste incineration. Each of these cities was chosen with care, and delegations
of metropolitan representatives participated in order to facilitate
consensus on how to move forward at home.
In the late 1990s, Barcelona began to transform its economy by emphasizing
knowledge-intensive industries in the form of biomedical and life
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
Exposure to outside influences
The cities recognized that applicable lessons could be found in other cities. No
matter what their starting point or area of interest, each city has engaged in a
serious, conscientious and sustained effort to seek out knowledge from other
cities and bring back lessons for application to problems back home. Table 9.3
presents a few of the many features—organizing sponsor, delegation size, themes
172 Crucibles of learning
sciences and university education, and created a specialized innovation
district known as “22@Barcelona.” This push for knowledge intensity,
combined with expanded facilities in international conferencing, put in
place the foundations for a self-reinforcing process of city learning.
Barcelona’s leadership was aware that Bilbao and Madrid were pursuing
similar strategies. Bilbao eventually proclaimed itself a “learning center with
the institutionalization of knowledge management.” Partly because of this
competition, Barcelona’s learning effort reached a wider array of global
destinations than did the smaller cities considered in this study.
Table 9.3 City-to-city exchanges: typical features
City Routine Typical Sample Example of city
sponsor or delegation themes visited
organizer size
of visits
Barcelona City, Chamber of 25–75 Partnerships with Seattle,
Commerce and private sector; Silicon Valley
LED* agencies venture capital
Charlotte Chamber, LED 40–75 Land bridges, Amsterdam,
agency, GMF* light rail Portland
Portland Chamber, GMF 45–70 Land use, Copenhagen,
bicycles in transit Brussels
Turin City, LED 25–50 Strategic planning, Barcelona,
agencies, land use, Stockholm,
Chamber, GMF economic Glasgow
development
* Note: LED = local economic development; GMF = German Marshall Fund
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
and hosts—typical of learning from external sources. Barcelona is included for
comparison in Table 9.3.
All the cities engaged in a program of visits, some of which have been sustained
over decades and involved multiple and direct exchanges covering a diverse set
of issues. The cities were deliberate in their searches and acquisitions of lessons.
They identified specific objectives, selecting cities that were experienced in similar
issues of policy and practice in infrastructure, services or social issues.
Figure 9.3 presents a schematic diagram of some of the cities cited by interviewees
as study destinations.2 On the whole, each of the cities conducted at least
one visit per year—almost certainly an undercount, given the limitations of this
inquiry. The graphic shows that Barcelona has connected with a wider geographic
array of cities (as is the case with most cities in the population range of five million
or more). The other three case cities, all smaller in population, stayed mainly in
Western Europe and the US. A handful of cities attracted visits from both sides
of the Atlantic.
At the same time, many differences distinguish external learning in these case
cities. As we shall see in the ensuing discussion, visits organized by business and
trade interests often, but not always, operate on more commercial criteria with a
somewhat narrower focus than those organized by the City Hall or city development
agencies. For example, Barcelona’s visit to Silicon Valley (indicated in Figure
9.3), organized by the Development Agency and the Chamber of Commerce, was
aimed at exploring the robust system of venture capital in the Valley. No such
system has been developed anywhere in Spain, and many businesses were vitally
interested in supporting high-tech startups being launched in Barcelona. In
contrast, Turin’s visits organized by the City Hall and Portland’s sponsored by the
Comparative Domestic Policy Program of the German Marshall Fund of the United
States aimed at issues more in the public realm—for instance, strategic planning
and democratic participation in Turin, and bicycles and open space in Portland.
In the case of Turin, specific and well-targeted connections were arranged to
help the city guide its own work in two strategic planning cycles during the period
1993–2005. During each period of strategic planning, Turin arranged for guest
presentations to be made by visiting delegations from European cities. Recall that
in Turin’s first planning phase, when the idea of a strategic plan was novel there,
five cities with well-known achievements in strategic planning (Barcelona, Bilbao,
Glasgow, Lyon and Stockholm) were invited in sequence to present their experiences
to a local audience of planners and the public. The audience included a
wide cross-section of Turin’s political leadership, its technical professionals, and
business groups, as well as the broader public.
Charlotte was similar to Turin, though on a smaller scale and with the Chamber
of Commerce taking a more active role, for instance, focusing on downtown urban
Clouds of trust in style 173
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
Glasgow
Edinburgh
Lyon
Manchester
Brussels
Bilbao
Stockholm
Turin
Warsaw
Tallin
Valencia
Rotterdam
Dublin Munich Moscow
Singapore
Beijing
Mumbai
Silicon Valley
San Diego
Boston
Atlanta
Seattle
Amsterdam
Salt Lake City
Shanghai
Utrecht
Copenhagen
Prague
Helsinki
Belgrade
Vancouver
Guadalajara
Mexico City
Minneapolis
San Francisco
Austin
Chicago
Denver
Tampa
St Louis
Jacksonville
Houston
Nashville
Cleveland
Dallas
Indianapolis
Frankfurt
Portland
Charlotte
Barcelona
Figure 9.3 Schematic map of city-to-city exchanges
Key: circle = sending city; square = receiving city; square over circle = both
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
design and infrastructure. Charlotte’s visit to Portland studied practical and
financial issues in the light rail system. Chamber of Commerce visits to Amsterdam
and Denver were cited in interviews as being helpful in understanding issues
about moving people in higher-density, downtown spaces. In the latter half of
the last decade, the focus in Charlotte began to shift toward its fast-moving demographic
picture and a variety of other issues connected to the city’s changing
economic fortunes brought on by the globalization of the financial sector and
the recent financial crisis.
These learning experiences triggered an intensive, introspective approach to
civic and racial relations in Charlotte, covering issues such as inter-neighborhood
equity, quality of education, and civic leadership. These fundamental changes
provoked the city to conduct a “self-visit”—organized by the Chamber of
Commerce with good reviews from participants—to focus internally on the
economic and social issues affecting Charlotte.
City-to-city learning in Portland was pursued explicitly as a source of new
knowledge, and recently, in contrast to Turin’s concern with strategic planning,
Portland has focused on what might be called second-generation public-goods
issues arising from earlier innovations in land use regulation. Many complicated
ramifications flowed from the imposition of the physical growth boundary put
in place in the 1970s. The planning focus fell onto the integration of land use
with transit, and in particular with light rail, streetcars, walking, bicycles, and
the connections between mobility, green space and livable neighborhoods.
Many respondents from Portland spoke of “eye-opening” insights about
the use of bicycles and walkways in Amsterdam and Copenhagen. These cities
view pedestrian modes as functional elements in the overall transit network.
Portlanders learned that paths for biking and walking have “to have a destination.”
The European cities taught Portland that bicycles and walkways were
not merely aesthetic or recreational elements, but legitimate, even essential parts
of the urban transit system.
Summing up external ties
In sum, the cities shared a strong interest in city-to-city learning, but differences
are evident in agency, sponsorship, purpose, and destination of learning. On the
whole, US cities tended to be led somewhat more by business groups, while
European cities were led by City Hall and economic development agencies. Portland
and Charlotte relied mostly, but not entirely, on city visits driven by the Chamber
of Commerce or other local business groups in annual, well-attended and productive
events. Interspersed with these were specific visits organized by outside
Clouds of trust in style 175
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
groups such as the German Marshall Fund. Somewhat in contrast is Turin, where
the city and its agencies (economic development and Torino Internazionale, an
agency whose mandate is to implement strategic plans) took the lead. Turin’s business
groups were involved, but were secondary or at least were not alone in driving
the process and shaping the agenda. Similarly, in Barcelona the metro agency
planning unit designed learning visits, and these were complemented by other
development groups as the city’s global intentions began to gain momentum.
Comparing organizational styles of learning
What about the other styles of learning, the technical and corporate? How do
these stack up in terms of acquisition of knowledge and internal relationships?
The styles of proactive cities have advantages and drawbacks and they can be
compared in relation to four factors. These are:
1 their relative flexibility of change in response to new circumstances;
2 the degree to which they are participatory;
3 the extent to which newcomers must overcome barriers to enter the planning
elites.
The modalities also vary in
4 the way knowledge is managed and stored and how it is converted to reform
and innovation.
We look at each of these in turn.
Flexibility in structure
The informal operating style in Turin and Charlotte allows the cities a freewheeling
ability to deploy the mechanisms of learning flexibly. Indeed, some of the learning
in Charlotte—by the Chamber of Commerce, for instance—was conducted separately
and independently from others in the central core of planners. Seattle is a
case where exactly the opposite is true. The large and evolving central core shapes
the agenda and point of view of the Puget Sound Regional Partnership. On the
other hand, the Charlotte group could shift focus in rather short order without
losing its overall sense of direction. For instance, city leaders showed a long-term
drive toward reshaping the downtown area, but also made many short-term forays
into issues such as race, schools, community development and inner-city commercial
success, all related but not central to the downtown reformation.
176 Crucibles of learning
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
Turin’s focus was held to a narrower scope by the discipline of strategic plans
and later the Winter Olympics. But the airing of opinion and processing of ideas
in informal sessions, like the Mayor’s Friday tea and innumerable public planning
meetings, allowed for consideration of a wide array of ideas.
Opening the door to new issues was more restrained in cities with relatively
technical and corporate learning styles. Amman and Curitiba operate with more
narrowly defined agendas which, once analyzed internally, are put before a wider
audience. Portland, though categorized as an informal learning city because of
its many interest groups, and particularly the young who find a way to be heard,
sometimes has the airs of a technical learner because of the institutionalized
and professional mandate of Metro.3 If a technical meeting is not scheduled,
cyclists might be expected to organize a breakfast on bikes on one of the city
bridges to grab headlines and make their point. Bilbao’s heavy system of ordered
meetings and structured agendas makes the process of discovery and deliberation
much more predictable, but also more cumbersome. If Bilbao and Seattle did
not have executive bodies or boards, they would need to invent an action figure
to carry business forward.
Furthermore, styles have evolved. The learning style of the Trade Development
Alliance (TDA) in Seattle began perhaps as the most informal and in many ways
the most inward of the cases reviewed here. The intense interaction among
participants on a study and other missions (trade and special visits) served to break
down barriers and forge new bilateral and multilateral understandings among
public, private and civic groups. This laid the groundwork for a complementary
and more corporate style of learning in Seattle today. Curitiba demonstrated
great flexibility in the way its technical resources were deployed and Tampere’s
loose corporate style allowed for great flexibility by accommodating inputs from
many directions.
Participation and barriers to entry
Whether corporate, technical, informal, or a hybrid like Barcelona, all the cities
brought a large variety of stakeholders to the table and incorporated them
into a formal structure with a balance of power that accommodated deliberation
and decision making. Each learning style—loose, technical or formalized—finds
a way to identify and incorporate business and civic leaders and other stakeholders
into the process of knowledge discovery and validation. Curitiba and Bilbao use
highly structured agencies; Portland and Turin used more open, even ad hoc
methods. Portland and Charlotte were perhaps most disposed to allow newcomers
to break into the conversation.
Clouds of trust in style 177
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
The structure of the learning group inevitably affects the ease and quality of
participation by a wider public. Recall from the Portland story the exclamations
by young newcomers in Portland—“you get heard” and “it’s not done yet”—
which contrast somewhat with the surprise expressed by newcomers in Turin that
invitations were received out of the blue. Both systems found a way to get young
people into the processing of ideas, but the tight internal connections in Turin
contrast with the wider, heterogeneous structure of Portland’s cloud. Bilbao,
Amman and Seattle, while all professedly open to incorporating public opinion,
do so by more structured means. There is a sense that as the cities move “up”
the ladder of official representation, the doors of access close a little further.
Keeping the doors freely swinging becomes a topic of managerial challenge,
one that we address in the next chapter.
Learning and knowledge
The technical group, Amman, Juárez and Curitiba, were especially good at
building and storing data. Our global survey showed that having a responsible
unit in charge and following up with seminars were generalizable for all the
proactive reformers, but think tanks do this best. Corporate models also foster
deep reservoirs of knowledge, not just data and statistics but analytical material
as well. Seattle and Bilbao have built up a large stock of institutional knowledge.
To some extent, the knowledge base in all cities floats around in clouds of trust.
But what about the informal style? Are they at a disadvantage by not having
more institutionalized storage? Can the knowledge outside relatively shallow
working memory in clouds of trust be converted to long-term memory and
accessed over time? Informal styles may be flexible, but do they risk tradeoffs of
losing access to knowledge over time?
Storage and access are not the only management issues. Turning back to
Granovetter’s (1983) loose ties, we are reminded that those occasional ad hoc,
sometimes accidental encounters are those that are most likely to provide the
source of break-out ideas. Certainly all cities can benefit from off-hand discoveries,
but few cities can expect much in new knowledge and even less in soft infrastructure
by engaging only in casual learning. Accordingly, cities need to manage
two types of learning modes, one loose and the other strong.
178 Crucibles of learning
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
Getting from knowledge to innovation
Assigning value to knowledge and making efforts to obtain it achieve only part
of the formula for innovation. Each of the styles demonstrates a way to achieve
the second, innovative, step. The informal cities establish ties on the fly and in
specific projects or challenges. For example, the challenges of the Olympic bid in
Turin or the change of the guard in Charlotte were met using the capital of trust
stored in the network relationships. The innovation involved in winning the bid
for the Olympics or creating an interim leadership depended on a central figure
or group who could draw the elements together, as the Mayor and the University
Rector did in Turin, and as foundations did in Portland. Distributed trust then
relied on a point person to act.
Technical cases work differently. Knowledge developed in focal places—the
think tanks in Amman, Curitiba and Juárez—and relies on distributed actors to
make use of it in innovative ways. Technical strength builds knowledge in a
confined way, within their technical cadres, and think tanks relied on their
reputations to have good answers for rights of way or land use suggestions.
Corporate bodies draw on both concentration and distribution. Knowledge
in Bilbao, Seattle and Tampere is fed into a corporate body from many sources
for deliberation, and decisions about innovative uses are taken by representatives
of the community both individually and collectively.
Notes
1 The next chapter will delve more deeply into why cities do not learn, or if they do, why
they fail to innovate.
2 The cities named in Figure 9.2 are only a partial list compiled from information in
interviews and complemented by other sources to reflect activity during a representative
span of time, for instance during strategic planning 1993–2005 in Turin, or during
1995–2009 in the other cities. Accordingly, the cities listed here will not coincide necessarily
with those appearing in the web-based survey reviewed in Chapter 5. Also,
outside agents, such as the Transatlantic Cities Network of the Comparative Domestic
Policy Program, have sponsored visits or exchanges involving Turin, Portland and
Charlotte. Other programs in the German Marshall Fund have sponsored exchanges, but
not always related directly to city issues.
3 Portland Metro refers to the elected metropolitan government of the Portland urban
region.
Clouds of trust in style 179
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
References
Borgatti, S. P., M. G. Everett and L. C. Freeman (2002). Ucinet for Windows: software for
social network analysis, Analytic Technologies, Harvard, MA.
Dente, B. and P. Coletti (2009). “Measuring governance in urban innovation,” International
Research Society for Public Management, 6–8 April, p. 17.
Granovetter, M. (1973). “The strength of weak ties,” The American Journal of Sociology,
78, pp. 1360–1380.
Granovetter, M. (1983). “The strength of weak ties: a network theory revisited,” Sociological
Theory, 1, pp. 201–233.
Lazer, D. and A. Friedman (2007). “The network structure of exploration and exploitation,”
Administrative Science Quarterly, 52, pp. 667–694.
180 Crucibles of learning
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
Part IV
Secrets of a knowing and
accelerating change
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
10 Taking stock: why some cities learn and
others do not
City learning is about the creation of a certain type of social capital. It is not just
the novel practices or hot technologies. Learning is about the shared values held
by people from all walks of life who care about the city where they live. The dayto-
day cross-currents in political interests and economic forces, the interruptions
in political terms, the occasional calamity—all make the continuity of management
or mayor leadership difficult to sustain in most places. Proactive learning
cities are able to count on networks of individuals who learn for and on behalf
of their cities. This takes place even in cities like Juárez where civil strife reaches
a level of lethal conflict equivalent to wartime. All of the cities that have achieved
reforms or innovations have also, as an organized collective, proactively pursued
new knowledge as an explicit or implicit part of the change process and managed
to convert individual and private learning into a collective capital that benefits
the public realm.
One of the chief aims of this book is to bring this learning side of urban
development into the open. The learning discussed here is not merely a matter
of a mayor bringing home a great idea and issuing instructions to make it happen.
Proactive learning cities have a much thicker and better-connected institutional
character. Gathering and managing new knowledge in this way is an important
aspect of urban development that has been largely overlooked. At the same time,
many counter-factual cities need to be explored. Some cities learn, but don’t
reform. These varying outcomes are explored later in the chapter.
The book has focused on those cities that have proven to be the most ambitious—
the proactive and reformer-learners. The aim has been to glean what we
can from their experiences, recognizing the many learning channels that operate
everyday, ranging from the individual civic-minded neighbor, to the profitseeking
entrepreneur, to burgeoning and proven programs in city twinnings
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
and clusters, and even “grazing.” And while cities can benefit from all of these
learning channels, the focus has been on spontaneous movement within cities
because it shows effective demand and sustained effort. The self-organizing
nature of proactive learners helps us to see distinctive features—for instance, in
the targeting of learning and the mechanisms for processing and storage—that
might help to improve other, conventional forms of assistance, such as, twinning,
working in clusters, and conventional technical assistance and institutional
capacity building. For instance, twinning and clustering generally impact a narrower
community of practice. More important, they must negotiate the objectives
and terms of learning in what are almost always asymmetrical relationships in
terms of finance and technical knowledge. Of course, the proposition is not either
one or the other, twinning or full-blown proactive learners, but how the many
kinds of learning are fitted into a strategic pattern as seen in proactive cities.
Taking stock of cities
If we could imagine collapsing global space over the past 50 years, we might see
cities as cells under a microscope, their Brownian-like motion directed at intercell
buffeting. We would recognize something peculiar in this frenetic interaction.
The buffeting is not random, but patterned. The cells visit one another and
exchange some mysterious substance. Unlike material exchange, most of which
is packaged and shipped at arm’s length, knowledge is exchanged personally.
Most of the critical knowledge brought into innovative use for the cities discussed
in this book has been exchanged within and among networks, but in a face-toface
mode.
The book has argued that there are two reasons for this. First, working policies
and practice are complicated and strongly dependent on context. The trained
eyes of city practitioners can immediately detect the gravity of contextual differences
and gauge whether adjustments can be made to import and adapt the idea
successfully. A second reason for face-to-face exchange is that the most experienced
learners and wisest organizational gurus realize that bonding internally,
among the learning team, is critical to success back home, even if an idea is not
picked up on a study tour. The interpersonal exchange of values is vital to the
establishment of a free-trade zone of ideas and the creation of an innovative
atmosphere.
Perhaps the single most important observation from this review is that, though
cities learn in many different ways, a significant part of their learning comes
from other cities. It is already evident that achieving urban learning is much
more complicated than a straight technology transfer. The learning process and
184 Secrets of knowing and accelerating change
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
institutional capacity building will run over many years and entail multiple layers
of learning.
But the findings in this analysis suggest that cities are making the market. They
are not waiting for national or international agencies to set things up for them.
They seem to be engaged in learning because gaining well-defined knowledge
cuts the risk of loss or failure. Visits on the order of thousands per year suggest
that cities are making use of this risk-adaptation model. Policy makers should be
thinking about ways to make that market work better, to provide assistance to
early adopters, and explore ways to reduce barriers for others to take part.
The approach in the book is to divide the world of cities in several ways. First
is to group them by the effort they exert in learning. Recall that my typology
ranges from “proactive” to “grazers.” They all learn, but the highest pay-offs
take place in those cities, proactive learners, that dedicate an agency and spend
money on the process. At the middle of the spectrum are cities that share special
features, like those that cluster around issues of heritage, health, environment
or ports, where learning is focused on specific topics. Close to these in practice
are cities engaged in twinning or one-on-one exchanges. At the opposite end of
the spectrum from proactive learners, a point where any city might be represented
at times, are those that merely window-shop at conferences and expos. Though
outside assistance and policy change could help cities all along the spectrum, the
focus in the analysis was on the proactive types.
These in turn were further scrutinized in terms of reform and innovation,
and we can be confident that proactive cities are also reformers, and that reformers
are more likely to document lessons, have an office to manage information,
conduct follow-up activities to process knowledge and deepen learning, and
above all have well-connected networks to test knowledge and act coherently.
These are all mechanisms for discussion, processing ideas, storing information,
and converting good ideas to innovative uses.
Frequency of city-to-city visits doesn’t appear to predict anything about
reform. Rather, if we are to generalize from the reports by survey takers, reform
and innovation seem to be more about the time spent on learning—both away
and at home—and not about the total numbers of trips made.
Proactive reformers spend more time on learning, visit often and longer, and
tend to go after more analytical topics than their cousin non-reformers. Reformers
are seeking knowledge on metropolitan governance and local economic development,
two of the most pressing and complicated urban issues of the day. Nonreformers
tend to be looking for tools and practices of day-to-day business. Cities
of both kinds are seeking information on urban transport. Climate change is on
the mind of some cities, but this topic was not very much emphasized; certainly
it was not given the priority that development assistance agencies would accord
Taking stock 185
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
to it. An even wider gap in priorities appears to separate cities and developmentassistance
agencies in connection with gender and HIV issues.
It’s also notable that cities are visiting in a pattern that is not exactly in line
with trends and policy orientation of nations and the international development
community. We have to assume that cities from the South are visiting the North
for good reasons, unless we can find evidence to the contrary. But Southern cities
are also visiting their Southern neighbors. All directions in this exchange need to
be scrutinized further to understand how much travel to the North is linked
to shopping in Paris and how much to earnest and legitimate capture of new
knowledge about, say, cultural heritage or public–private arrangements in
Parisian land use planning.
Why cities do not learn
Despite notable successes here and there, on the whole, a large number of cities,
especially in the developing world, are not engaged in learning to be smart.
If gaining new knowledge is a risk-reduction strategy, why are more cities not
following this path? Why did it take more than three decades for Curitiba’s bus
rapid transit scheme to spread to other cities in Latin America? Why do successes
in a few places not spread more rapidly? We need to ask: why don’t cities learn?
The premise of this book is that many cities that succeed have a learning
system, even though some of them might not call it that. The book has tried to
show the mechanics and processes of learning and how learning plays a role in
creating an innovative climate. No cities were found that were proactive learners
and were not engaged in innovation or change. But what about cities that cannot
meet the requirements to be learners? Some of these have pieces of whole
assemblies of learning systems. Others seem to be stuck, and still others phase in
and out of learning periods. Table 10.1 summarizes the relationship between
learners and reformers.
186 Secrets of knowing and accelerating change
Table 10.1 Conceptual map of learners and reformers
Learner Non-learner
Innovator Cases in Part III One-shot wonders
Colombo, Dakar, Surabaya,
Naga City
Non-innovator None found Half of the survey
(see Table 10.2)
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
To sharpen the question, we can take a closer look at some cities that categorize
themselves as having made few or no reforms—the non-innovators in Table
10.1—but do not meet the criteria of being learners. Some of these—Colombo,
Dakar, Surabaya and Naga City—were reported as having made few reforms,
yet each has one or more of the features—but none has all—of making visits,
having an office, tracking outcomes, or documenting lessons. Unfortunately, we
have no information about the critical component of clouds of trust in these cities.
And though our database may be small, let’s assume for the moment that the
data and the methodological factors in gathering data for this book are not
themselves at issue, or at least are not the only issue. What other explanations
might account for cities—those in the bottom-right half of Table 10.1—that are
not proactive and do not change? Around half the cities in the survey, those listed
in Table 10.2, fit in this quadrant. Exploring some of the reasons why they do
not learn will put us in a better place to draw conclusions and suggest steps to
improve the harvest of learning and the prospects for reform.
Table 10.2 shows those cities according to the extent to which they have
achieved one or more of the learning factors. It’s worth remembering that this
measure is subjective and the judgment of only one person, the survey respondent.
Taking stock 187
Table 10.2 Institutional attributes
City Institutional elements
Pop Has Documents Follows Tracks Holds One or
(mlns) office sessions more
Turin 1.2 Yes No No Yes Yes 3
Kobe 1.5 No Yes No No No 1
Melbourne 3.9 No Yes No No Many 2
Pateros 0.75 Yes No No No DK* 1
Masbate 0.55 Yes No No Yes Few 2
Stockholm
Metro 1.9 Yes Yes Yes No Some 3
Surabaya 3.0 Yes No Yes Yes Few 3
Tabriz 1.4 Yes Yes No No Many 3
Tehran 12.7 Yes Yes No No Many 3
Ulaanbaatar 1.1 Yes No No Yes Few 2
Hanoi 0.7 Yes Yes Yes Yes Few 4
*DK = Don’t know
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
Six reasons for failing to learn
We can identify numerous reasons why cities do not engage in learning in any
systematic way. Not all of them are simply the mirror-image opposites to those
we have identified as features of proactive learners. The reasons fall into three
broad groups. One group relates to external factors, one intermediate, and
another more internal. Each will be discussed in more detail below.
In the external set, the first reason is calamity: the disruptive forces of natural
and man-made disasters, such as those that impacted Kobe, Japan and, more
recently, Juárez, Mexico. Another set of reasons is that some cities, like Surabaya,
Tabriz and Tehran, are subject to forces such as centralized national policy or a
political environment—macroscopic factors—that block free and open exchange
and are cautious about innovation.
The intermediate group consists of factors that push a learning city off course.
Some cities—Turin is a good example—can point to learning in the past, but
have fallen out of the rhythm of learning. They are in a phase transition. After
very impressive results over a period of more than a decade, some of the city’s
elements of learning have atrophied.
The third set of reasons concerns the internal capacity of cities. Many cities
are simply too small to muster a critical mass of institutional and social capital
for sustained learning. Pateros, Philippines provides an example. Fourth among
all is that some cities have institutional capacity, but have not gone the extra
mile to gather sufficient knowledge in order to shape clear options. Fifth, still
others have plenty of knowledge, but no coherence of action to keep them
moving forward. Tarragona and Mumbai are introduced as new cases to illustrate
these last two reasons. Let’s take each of these reasons in turn.
Calamity
Kobe, Japan is an industrial port city of less than two million. Kobe has achieved
notable innovations—for instance, in the staging of the Kobe Arts Biennial, solid
waste management, and Kobe Luminaire, a lights festival in commemoration of
the loss of life following the 1995 earthquake. Recent innovations are few. One
factor is that the city has experienced long-term ripple effects from the
devastating earthquake in 1995. A recent report on the difficulty in progressing
forward with planning for the city cited reverberations from the top-down actions
of Kobe’s strong mayor in the immediate aftermath of the quake. Decisive actions
taken at the time helped Kobe to speed its recovery, but also underscored the
importance, magnified during times of disaster, of community participation and
188 Secrets of knowing and accelerating change
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
social organization in advance of planning for recovery (Shaw and Goda, 2004).
The effects of natural and man-made calamities—such as Hurricane Katrina in
New Orleans, the drug wars in Juárez, or the tsunamis that have devastated
communities in Indonesia and Japan—create tremendous disruption in assembling
the social capital and institutional wherewithal to undertake (and in the case of
Juárez, to continue) learning on a systematic basis.
Macro factors
Surabaya has accomplished notable reforms, but according to a case study,
it was capable of many more. In one documented case, the city converted 400
of its vehicles to biogas fuels. In reviewing the project experience, Nakamura
notes the strong local (i.e., endogenous) political reasons why adoption of more
new ideas may be difficult (Nakamura, 2010). Among these are the tradition
of central control in Indonesia, even though the country has been undergoing
rapid decentralization since the “big bang” transformation of the late 1990s.
Moreover, city leaders, particularly mayors, have little incentive to adopt programs
for long-range effect, like those relating to climate change. In contrast,
Nakamura correlates adoption of environmental change with that in other cities
—Chiang Mai, Rayon and Muangklang, all in Thailand—where greater local
government autonomy was coupled with NGOs and a proactive stance by the
mayor.
Cities that failed to achieve milestones in ICLEI programs for climate change
shared features which are similar to or complicate those of non-learners, i.e.,
absence of institutional capacity. Nakamura found that professional staff members
were unwilling to pursue change without a clear-cut signal from local political
leadership. Other issues include questions, real and perceived, about autonomy
of local governments to act; limited availability of finance; and whether or not
active NGOs were in the picture.
Phase changes
While conducting research for this book, I asked the CEO of a high-tech area in
Barcelona to address the topic of leadership in the city. “There are about 100
individuals who run the city,” he said, in a matter-of-fact way. Asked to name
some of them, he replied: “It would have to be one list before the year 2000 and
another list afterwards.” By this he meant that one leadership group worked in
unison when the city was enjoying soaring success in the 1990s, and another group
Taking stock 189
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
was in power, so to speak, afterwards, when the city began to struggle following
a recession and rapid onset of technology change early in this century.
I noted that a few individuals crossed over the two periods, but not many. Other
informants corroborated this observation. The point is that like all city organizations,
maybe more than corporations, leadership changes, and with the changes
comes the risk of interruption in the continuity not just of political power, but also
of understanding and values shared by those in the inner circle of managing the
city’s fortunes. Juárez, Charlotte and Turin are also indicative of these circumstances.
Juárez and Charlotte can be seen to be weaving in and out of learning phases,
because of leadership, external conditions (as in Juárez), or macro-economic or
political change in the cases of Charlotte and Turin. Both of these cities accomplished
multiple innovations over decades. But central leaders in Charlotte’s
success have faded out of the picture with age or external circumstances (the
collapse of the financial industry in the US). Turin’s innovative energies have
fallen into decline after four successive administrations capped off by the Winter
Olympics. Recall that the build-up of institutional capacity is a process of decades,
not years, and we see hints, if not clear evidence, of how easily a learning system
can be disrupted.
The third group of reasons for failure to learn consists of cities that for one
reason or another have not met the threshold of motivation and critical mass of
ingredients to make learning a part of development. Three cases help to illustrate
these conditions. One of them, represented by smaller communities like Pateros,
Philippines is representative of a threshold issue. Tarragona, Spain and Mumbai,
India exhibit internal dissent and a failure to take off or stumbling along the way.
Below the threshold
A small municipality nestled in Metro Manila, Pateros, population under 100,000,
was classified as a non-reformer and had few of the attributes of a learning city.
The average income for Philippine cities is just over US$3,000 per year. Limited
budgets and the proverbial weakness of institutional capacity in the first place
makes systematic learning difficult for hundreds if not thousands of small municipalities
like Pateros. Cities in this category are often unable to clear the thresholds
of enlightened leadership, political motivation, financial clout, or institutional
strength necessary to get started on learning. Numerous programs of national
and international assistance, such as twinning, cluster learners and lending, can
help to clear some of these thresholds. The problem is that the sheer number of
cities in the size range of Pateros—more than 4000 around the globe—represents
an issue of scale that is difficult for outside agents to address.
190 Secrets of knowing and accelerating change
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
Limited knowledge—Tarragona, Spain
Tarragona is a city of under 200,000 inhabitants located to the south of Barcelona,
where hills of several hundred meters overlook a natural harbor. These features
attracted the first Roman settlement on the Iberian Peninsula. Roman legions
were stationed there for several centuries and built fortifications and splendid
civil works that still stand today. Tarragona now trades on its strong tourist appeal,
which involves its beaches and the ruins, now restored and integrated into the
urban fabric. But it wasn’t always like that.
Three decades ago, while many cities in Spain were pondering their own
pathways toward greater independence from Madrid, Tarragona staged a planning
exercise complete with public debates. The issue of economic direction was
central: one option was to maintain and develop the fishing and related industries,
which had evolved over decades, particularly after World War II. A second option
was to head in the cultural, touristic and educational direction, building in part
on the city’s handsome architectural heritage from Roman times.
A vote was put to the population, which, like the leadership in the city, was
divided on the issue. The referendum resulted in a decision to stick to an industrial
strategy, despite the many assets in cultural heritage. Industry was something the
populace knew, a sector that had employed voters and their parents’ generation.
The moment of decision came at the same time that Bilbao and Barcelona were
about to adopt outward, cultural and touristic strategies.
Had Tarragona’s leadership taken greater measure of the direction in neighboring
cities like Barcelona and Valencia, it might have been able to build more
confidence in a non-industrial strategy. Several decades later, Tarragona, realizing
the mistake of the referendum, reversed its course, but had by then lost decades
of higher growth. With a stronger sense of vision, clearer ideas about how alternative
pathways might have been formed and where they might have led,
Tarragona’s voters might have reached a different decision.
Adequate knowledge, limited cohesion—Mumbai
A world away from Tarragona is Mumbai, one of India’s largest population centers
(population of the core area around 12 million) and its pre-eminent economic
powerhouse. Financial, trade and entertainment industries have driven the city’s
per capita income to among the highest in Asia. But deep cultural, economic
and political divisions have impeded its development.
One of the most glaring obstacles is the yawning gap between rich and poor.
Financial and Bollywood millionaires share a metropolitan area with a poor major-
Taking stock 191
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
ity. The respective living circumstances give expression to the acute economic
divergence. Dharavi, the city’s most famous slum and home to 800,000 people,
occupies a large quadrant of the city. Despite its well-known industry of smallscale
producers and recyclers, the residents in this settlement live on less than a
couple of dollars a day. Nearby, gleaming high-rise towers are home to the rich.
For decades, the business and commercial communities, organized as “Mumbai
2020,” have worked to form a vision of the future. One objective was to make
Mumbai a world-class financial center. But clogged transportation and incomplete
infrastructure, both partial derivatives of irrational land use, have driven property
prices to reach a level with those in Manhattan. Dharavi grew up in Mumbai for
the same reasons that slums develop elsewhere in the world. Often at the core
of the problem is a sluggish or dysfunctional system of land allocation and taxation,
opening the door for speculation and leaving the poor in desperate straits
as the rich bid up the prices of residential and commercial space.
In each of these last two cases, many deep-seated problems—ranging from
demographic and economic change in Tarragona to historical and cultural
divisions in Mumbai—complicated the formation of a coherent and dedicated
effort to learn and convert learning to innovative policy break-throughs. In each
of them, some aspect of learning might have made a difference. Tarragona had
alternative models at its doorstep. Barcelona, Valencia and Bilbao were each busy
developing ideas about city growth. Leadership in Tarragona appears not to have
extended first-order learning into wider circles. Voters and stakeholders in the
city’s future economic success might have made different choices had they
possessed a clearer idea of alternative pathways to the future.
Mumbai 2020 worked to develop alternative ideas, but the critical breakdown
was at the deeper level of what I have called third-order learning: the creation
of a coherent body of thought and values. Clearly a strong unifying force was
needed—probably one that would involve change in property rights and land
use—and this still eludes Mumbai. Yet the city, and particularly Mumbai 2020,
has never lacked the means to learn about solutions in financial centers elsewhere,
in places like London, New York and Shanghai.
In fact, Mumbai 2020 sponsored many forays outward to gather ideas and
shape plans. But the business-minded constituency of Mumbai 2020 did not
extend into public sector domains, where a very different set of values prevailed.
The two worlds are still separated by a wide chasm of uncertainty and suspicion.
A coalition of interests in Mumbai has recently pressed to reform state laws that
keep land locked away from the market. But these initiatives are being challenged
in the courts. Mumbai seems far from reaching a ba.
192 Secrets of knowing and accelerating change
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
Orders of learning and context
Many other cities could be placed in one or another of the groups of non-learners.
The purpose of documenting a selected few is not to argue that learning is the
root cause of breakdown in reform. It is certainly not the main factor in innovation
and change, but it is quite possibly one of many factors that deserve more
attention.
One set of factors can be inferred from the preliminary evidence gathered
for this book. The answer lies somewhere in the range of second- and thirdorder
learning. Recall from Chapter 1 in connection with Seattle, and again in
subsequent chapters: first-order learning refers to finding ideas; second-order
learning is dissemination internally; and third-order learning is the reaching of
a ba, where leadership communities achieve a level of self-identity and selfconfidence
that allows them to take chances, to share values, and above all to
think and act coherently and relatively quickly. Reaching a strong cloud of trust
at the core of the ba requires intensive commitment.
Deep dives into individual case studies gave us some clues about the way to
help cities learn. For one thing, we saw in Part III of this book organizational styles
that range from loosely ad hoc in Portland to tightly formal in Bilbao. Yet all the
cities were successful learners and innovators. It is no surprise that contextual and
historical circumstances play a role in how the organizational arrangements are
formed. But it is worth taking a fresh look at how contextual circumstances have
been managed and how some cities have cobbled together a learning system that
includes an innovative milieu.
The signal feature of third-order learning is that learning arrangements help
to create an atmosphere that is conducive to innovation. Further, in some cities,
new linkages in that organizational tissue are put together on the march, as the
work is being done, as in Turin. In others, the ties have evolved over time and
are reinforced where needed. In still others—Portland, for instance—the issue is
bridging between already well-established groups. In essence, these three
approaches give us further clues about how to stimulate and manage the
elemental units of soft infrastructure.
What about content? What has been learned?
In Chapter 2 we reviewed 10 issues that have emerged on city agendas over the
past decade, and saw later in Chapter 5 that only three or four of these are high
on the list of priorities for learning cities. At the same time, some cities have
Taking stock 193
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
indicated areas of vital concern that were not in the top 10. Several points are
worth bringing to light about the content of learning.
The survey results are remarkable in revealing an agenda of topics not focused
on the day-to-day machinery of running cities, for instance, land registries,
accounting practices, basic plan-making, project evaluation, personnel management,
and more. And yet, arguably, the great bulk of city learning in twinning
and one-on-one exchange of the kind being perfected in Europe takes place
precisely around these kinds of issues. For instance, British, Dutch, French, German
and Swedish municipal assistance programs grapple with the bread-and-butter
issues of democratic decision-making processes, such as participation to improve
demand detection, improved connect under-serviced communities, and systems
to record and manage data, services and pricing.
On the other hand, survey takers and respondents in case study interviews
were more focused on what might be called special problems as opposed to
routine management and professional skills. They are concerned with the startup
and institutional design of relationships between public and private sectors
in bus rapid transit systems or solid waste transfer, economic development and
project finance. These differing views undoubtedly reflect a segmented market
in the demand for learning, and any policy approach to improve sponsored learning
as a part of institutional capacity development should begin with a clear
picture of the objectives and audience.
In the wider scene of policy and practice, we might ask whether cities as a
collective—city leaders and national policy makers—are reaching a new global
understanding about policy issues that have long been debated over the past four
or five decades. Some of these issues include the role of cities in national economic
development, the advisability of promoting or retarding rural to urban migration,
the presence and long-term persistence of poverty in emerging (and some postindustrial)
nations, the pace and depth of change in democratic decentralization,
and the proper place for the private sector in public goods. All these have been
central to the policy debate about urbanization.
The sources of data and insight developed in this book can provide only
partial answers as to whether cities are gaining any new perspective or wisdom
about a general understanding or consensus. We cannot say and indeed
have not attempted to determine whether any new consensus has been achieved.
What is clear is that cities feel the impacts of all of these major issues, and
many are moving ahead to address them with actionable tools at the microscale.
It is evident from the cases, however, that the most successful proactive cities
have moved the needle quite far to incorporate a wider group of stakeholders
into the learning and planning process. Informal and corporate styles of learning
194 Secrets of knowing and accelerating change
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
show this most clearly. Turin, Portland, Seattle and Bilbao, and to a lesser extent
Curitiba, Juárez and Amman, have developed mechanisms to raise the common
denominator to include business interests in active exchange and often working
partnerships in connection with managing land use, transport and economic
development.
As for the 10 emerging issues identified in Chapter 2, the survey suggested
that cities have focused tightly on a few key areas (metropolitan governance,
local economic development), are still grappling with many long-standing issues
(urban transport, project finance), and have shown concern for some topics that
are not on the consensus list of global institutions at all, such as attracting and
retaining the young for economic development and management elites. Let’s
start with how that young talent gets into the mainstream.
Portland, Turin and Barcelona are deeply concerned about attracting and
retaining young global talent. The concern over young talent goes beyond the
insights raised by Richard Florida, whose seminal work on creative cities first drew
attention to the three “Ts,” talent, tolerance and technology, as central to competitiveness
(Florida, 2002). Whatever the degree of truth in Florida’s insights, it
is clear that cities with young talent share a common challenge of refreshing the
cadres of city leadership. Achieving a vibrant and responsive city requires sustained
leadership and a steady course over many years. Inputs from a wide range of
actors are vital to the process of collective understanding and coherent responses
to challenges. Learning cities must be engaged in a continuous effort to keep
fresh ideas flowing into the community.
Turin found ways to integrate new and younger elites in the governance
and planning process, but not in a systematic way. Accretion happened in a way
quite true to network theoretical ideas: attachments took place where network
members found the most appealing new links—for instance, in someone whose
message had been heard in public or by whom an article had been written. A
signal was picked up and someone in the network moved to incorporate the
author into it. Still, the results were surprising for the city and more surprising
for those invited to join the standing elites.
Young Portlanders found it easier to get heard, as many of the interviewees
attested in the Portland case study. Portland’s elite networks are well identified
and share among them a common underlying set of values like environmental
quality and greenness in cities.
Much like Turin, but on a larger scale, Barcelona has long been bidding for
global talent that is critical to success for its knowledge-based economy. Attracting
young professionals is only part of the battle. Keeping them requires accommodating
a different life and work style. In the words of one quipster in Barcelona,
the new global talent “is in love with the Blackberry, not the car.” This apparently
Taking stock 195
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
superficial reference actually has deep roots in cultural and generational change
that applies to many cities.
In the past, those moving up the ranks of power and the ladder of the elites
carried with them sets of values that prized sleek material assets. In the words of
one interviewee: “The old guard likes flashy cars; the young entrepreneurs prize
electronic gadgets.” Previous elites also understood that organizations run in
hierarchies. The younger generation of talent sees things differently: besides
spending a lot of time in the virtual world, newcomers are entrepreneurs and
see their social scene and business life on a flatter, less hierarchical, and more
decentralized landscape.
A second problem found in every city was that of metropolitan governance.
Many of the thousand cities have grown slowly to the realization that growth in
communities on the periphery was creating a burden of governance for which
most municipal legislation and governance tools were no match. Portland is
perhaps the most advanced of the cases examined in the book.
Portland’s growth boundary sets a solid framework, within which contending
groups can debate policy positions. A technical focus on demographic data
and land use, together with a limited array of clearly regional services, give
Portland’s Metro a role that for the most part has been managed successfully.
Twin Cities Metro Region in Minneapolis–St. Paul has taken a similar approach.
The Portland boundary and its limited services mandate provide a framework
for growth strategies and a focus for learning, for instance, around integrated
land use, parklands, open space, and transit strategies.
But for most cities, the widening scope of the city-regional economy and the
growing interrelationship in large-scale physical infrastructure makes interjurisdictional
arrangements even more important than they were in the past.
Many cities are most probably paying a price (a kind of self-imposed tax) on their
respective gross regional products by not capturing economies of scale in the
development of services like regional transport, solid waste and environmental
management and protection. Seattle and Bilbao are both making efforts to fill
this gap by having structured a deliberative governance and decision-making
system. The fact that every city is facing some version of this problem, especially
in the emerging nations, elevates the issue to a learning topic. At the same time,
scores of cities have tried many experiments—from economic development
agencies in India, to limited service responsibilities in Mexico, to several tiers of
government in Seoul. The harvests of learning from these and other cases should
be packaged and made more easily available to the many cities looking for
answers.
A third common issue is that of building a regional economy. Hand in glove
with area-wide governance is the prospect for fusion of nearby centers. For
196 Secrets of knowing and accelerating change
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
instance, in the Turin–Milan corridor, with the decrease in transaction costs that
will come with high-speed rail, trade will increase between the two nodes, meaning
greater movement of goods, professional skill and tourists. Increased rail
service between similar nodes in OECD countries—Lyon, Toulouse and central
Europe, and south to Barcelona and Valencia, as well as numerous cities in the
US, Japan, China and India—all offer many examples of living laboratories from
which each could learn lessons and prepare for inevitable change.
Summing up
The proactive learners represent a kind of idealized template, and no one should
underestimate the difficulty of replicating any one model. It requires an open
democratic process, enlightened leadership, a community of trust that few cities—
few communities anywhere—can claim as their own. And yet we have seen
numerous cases where pieces or whole assemblies have been put in place and
thrived over decades. Each of the groups of learners discussed in Chapter 4 can
be related to one or more of the basic elements of learning cities as a guide to
improving the yield of acquired knowledge and setting the stage for innovation
(see Box 10.1).
Taking stock 197
Box 10.1 Elements of learning
• Learning modalities. Previous cases each exhibited a style or mode of
learning—corporate, informal or technical, as described in Part III.
Evidence from those cases suggests that research organizations of some
kind (private or public, sometimes universities) may be important building
blocks for city learning, and that learning may take place in phases.
Field analysis will explore questions of “agency”—the presence of highlevel
technical excellence in nearby firms, facilities and universities is
important—and whether distinct phases are identifiable. Additional
questions concern digital means of learning, and whether and to what
extent digital capacity plays a role in learning, for instance, in face-toface
modality.
• Agency, storage and networks. A growing body of literature has begun
to focus on networks, seeing them as mechanisms of social and technical
bonding between and among professionals in a city region. Interactions
between members of the learning community can be seen as part of
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
With a deeper idea about how learning takes place, we can modify slightly the
gamut of learners that I first introduced in Chapter 4. Let’s start from the “bottom.”
Threshold cities
We recognize the very large number of cities that do not have the institutional
wherewithal—financial, technical or managerial—to get started on learning in
a collective sense. Small cities and towns (populations of around 100,000) are
often stuck in an institutional resource valley from which they cannot escape.
Grazers and “NEK” cities (not enough knowledge)
These have no system of learning, or only the rudiments of such a system. They
often need to define a purpose, a plan, an agency and an ongoing system just
to beef up the learning yield, so to speak, and to achieve first- and maybe secondorder
learning. Learning is somewhat catch-as-catch-can. The purpose of learning
may or may not be recognized as important in and for itself. Even if it is recognized
as such, the objective of learning is not defined and new knowledge is not
adequately vetted.
198 Secrets of knowing and accelerating change
the “soft infrastructure” in regional competitiveness. Scholars of social
capital have suggested that “tightness of bonds” (strong ties) in a network
consisting of like-minded players produces a coherent response
to meet new challenges. “Weak ties,” on the other hand, help to generate
“out-of-the-box” breakthroughs. Strong ties require focused
investment; weak ties are often haphazard. How do learning cities
manage this tension? Also, networks can be seen as a form of storage—
the living memory of learning experiences.
• Trust and openness. In addition to organizational aspects of learning,
previous work of many kinds has suggested that trust is an important
aspect of the learning process. One possible operative mechanism, which
I observed first hand in the case of Seattle, can be seen on those occasions
when city leaders share a deep knowledge-related experience, one that
lasts many days. When experiences of this kind are reinforced by subsequent
and multiple interactions among the same players, they form
bonds of trust and these facilitate sharing and cooperation.
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
“Twinners”
Those cities in twinning relationships, like those cities learning in clusters, have
pieces of the system in place in the sense that the learning topics are pre-defined,
either in the twinning arrangements or in the voluntary association with peer
communities of interest. Twinning has proved its worth and is making improvements
in the various aspects of exchange, such as taking ownership of the design
and scope of a program. Questions remain about the exercise of control, especially
of the financing and selection of activities. These questions are intrinsic to
asymmetrical relationships, as twinning almost always is. South–South twinning
improves these terms of trade, but can still be stuck on financing and over the
issues of who calls the shots. In most cases also, the terms of twinning relationships
are usually time-bound, as compared to proactive learners, whose programs are
continuous and wider in scope.
Special-purpose clusters (healthy cities, Agenda 21, heritage sites, C40) also
provide a rich, but in the greater scheme of things a narrow, channel of learning.
Like twinning, clustered learning can serve as a basis for a broader and longerterm
program. The definition of problems and objectives needs to reach beyond
the specific ones of, say, carbon footprint or preservation of heritage sites, to
affect direction and pace of growth in ways that involve additional stakeholders—
business groups, leadership elites—and maybe even to allied or complementary
long-term objectives about the future of the city.
Proactive cities
For all of these groups to reach beyond smart cities, they must put in place a
fluid system in which many stakeholders can interact in a common matrix of
relationships. Learning in proactive cities is self-defined. It is purposeful, geared
to the needs of the city as a whole, even if the particular subject in any given
period might be focused on transit, or parks, or specific neighborhoods. The
important thing is that agreement is reached on what to learn and on a process
of storing and applying knowledge locally. The clouds of trust represent a collective
council, an informal governance system, composed of people who believe in
and care about the place where they live. The ground needs to be laid so that
the process of learning and exchange is embedded and continuous.
To synthesize these patterns, I have used the term “order of learning” to
refer to stages of increased involvement and commitment (see Table 10.3), ranging
from registering new facts, to spreading knowledge, to reaching a ba where
leadership communities achieve a level of self-identity and self-confidence that
Taking stock 199
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
allows a city to take chances, to share values, and above all to think and act
coherently and react quickly.
Cities at or below the threshold of learning must either define their needs
for learning or, in the case of twinning, mentoring and clusters, their needs must
be pre-defined in conjunction with their partners. The proactive cities reviewed
in earlier chapters defined their own needs, usually as a function of an oncoming
crisis such as economic collapse or political reform, as in the cases of Seattle, Bilbao
and Turin. An executive body and institutional back-up help to achieve secondorder
learning, so that something is done with the knowledge. Question marks
in Table 10.3 indicate these as the points of challenge for learning cities. Only
the proactive cities reach the point of developing an innovative milieu, where
these steps are replicated and continuously refreshed.
Reaching a ba with strong cloud(s) of trust requires intensive commitment.
Few cities have aimed to create a ba deliberately, but many can improve or accelerate
learning once the mutual payoff is demonstrated and learning exercises are
undertaken to begin building trust. We shall look at ways to achieve these steps
in the next chapter.
200 Secrets of knowing and accelerating change
Table 10.3 Learning types and orders of learning
Learning type Activities and orders of learning
(example)
Knowledge Agency/ Trusting milieu
acquisition institutional (third order)
(first order) (second order)
Under threshold NA NA NA
(Pateros)
Not enough
knowledge Undefined ? ?
(Tarragona),
grazers
Twinners Pre-defined ?
Knowledge, ?
no cohesion
(Mumbai)
Proactive Self-defined
(Seattle)
Source: Author
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
References
Florida, R. (2002). The rise of the creative class, Basic Books, New York.
Nakamura, H. (2010). Political factors facilitating practice adoption through Asian intercity
network programmes for the environment, Institute for Global Environmental
Strategies, Hayama, Japan.
Shaw, R. and K. Goda (2004). “From disaster to sustainable civil society: the Kobe experience,”
Disasters, 28, pp. 16–40.
Taking stock 201
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
11 Turning the learning world upside down—
pathways forward in policy and research
Information and communications technologies have made a tremendous impact
already to change our world. One of the most promising new developments is
the diffusion of sensors and the embedding of trillions of transistors in global
cityscapes around the world. Advanced devices like these can do a lot to help
manage cities, but ICT can go only so far in helping cities learn. The material in
this book has pointed strongly to personal relationships among city leaders—
tycoons, mayors and neighborhood activists—who lie at the center of change.
Bonds of trust in these relationships are the indispensable elements in forming
a ba and vital to getting beyond smart cities.
Drawing together strands from the previous discussion suggests some directions
for a design of urban learning. It is important to note that we are basing
our conclusions on case data drawn mostly from intermediate and upper-income
cities. Translating lessons to the lowest-income cities requires care. It requires
making sometimes heroic assumptions about context and conditions. Case data
from Amman, Curitiba and Juárez, along with the survey data, provide some
rationale for assuming there is some applicability from post-industrial to emerging
cities.
The lessons apply in several ways. First, some will help to reformulate old
pathways or create new ones to advance learning. Second, the discovery of secrets
about proactive reform helps to set criteria for the identification of cities that
are good candidates for assistance. Third, the modalities of learning offer some
suggestions about the sequence of programmatic activities and the relationship
among learning events. Finally, the evidence suggests areas of management
attention—for the cities, project managers and helping institutions, and in policy,
program and research.
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
Getting right-side up in emerging cities
Hundreds of cities are showing the way towards a better future, and they suggest
an entirely new approach to solving urban problems in the global South. The
core concept is that solutions, or knowledge that is key to finding solutions,
already exist for many problems, but many high thresholds—conceptual, bureaucratic,
cultural and physical—block them from reaching more widespread
application.
The entire post-war model of development assistance to cities is predicated
upon a different approach, one that flows in the opposite direction. National
policy, economic adjustment, and conditionality require cities, lying at the tail
end of a long chain of institutions, to synthesize the often separate policy and
reform agendas of national authorities. This process often results in what Lloyd
Rodwin used to describe as “apoplexy at the center and anemia at the periphery.”
Cities are expected to meld policy reforms and exercise powers of implementation
that ministries themselves are often unable to achieve for them.
City exchange of knowledge constitutes an initiative that turns this paradigm
on its head, focusing on the horizontal dimension of exchange at the base, not
the apex, of the policy and implementation pyramid. Localities are the sources
of solutions. Exchange at this level has proven to be productive. It might be more
productive if some of the barriers to exchange were cleared away or overcome.
Cities face high thresholds—institutional, conceptual and cultural—that slow
the uptake of proven knowledge. Ironically, the transition to an urbanized planet
has come with a large surge in creative solutions by cities themselves. We are
not pretending that solutions are at hand everywhere. But solutions of some kind
can be found almost anywhere.
Hundreds of cities are now engaged in inventing or searching for solutions.
They operate today like so many disconnected laboratories of practice. Below
the mega-city range are around 400 cities that get less attention in policy and
marketing. According to McKinsey Research, these are the places that will be
generating 40 percent of global GDP growth in the next 15 years. Middle-class
families are being formed with the promise of new economic and political demand
(Dobbs et al., 2011).
Partly in anticipation of these changes, local, national and international
city-based associations have been formed and are growing more active. Among
other functions, international membership and technical organizations aim to
facilitate knowledge exchange among members. At the same time, global private
corporations like McKinsey, IBM, Cisco and others are beginning to see cities
as constitutive of a new customer class, and are finding novel applications for
advanced and ubiquitous technologies in information and communications.
Turning the learning world upside down 203
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
We see that many cities in the laboratory are energetic, but disorganized;
productive, but not still not efficient; promising, but lacking channels to reach
application more widely where they are needed. Above all, the barriers of institutions,
distant policy and isolated practice can be cleared away by activating
one of the most potent but underutilized resources available to address urban
problems: knowledge already invented in or possessed by other cities. The way
forward is to sharpen existing tools, create new ones, and open pathways to focus
on learning. In making these suggestions, the ultimate aim is not only to help
cities enhance the basis for forming a vision and guiding development. The larger
prize is to work toward embedding knowledge in the city culture as part of
the ba, an innovative milieu that allows urban communities to make coherent
decisions.
Approaches to learning
The approach proposed here focuses on the many barriers to getting started
and transmitting ideas, the misplaced incentives and blurry focus that cities and
facilitating institutions have with respect to knowledge. Knowledge sharing is
at a primitive stage. Institutional and personal incentives necessary to create a
market for exchange are smothered by national prerogatives or never activated
by cities operating on chronically anemic budgets. Players at all levels, local,
national and international, have roles to develop.
The three orders of learning discussed earlier lay out a framework for developing
learning approaches in cities. Learning entails setting up a system to acquire
new knowledge, to process it and verify that it has validity for the city in question,
and finally to float it in a cloud of trust so it gets the acid cynicism and passionate
support it deserves. Initial conditions and contextual circumstances will dictate
how a city might start. The central idea is that learning must be useful for the
cities, a tool for cities that must “advance their purposes,” as Peter Marris put it
in connection with the adoption of new technologies (Marris, 1974). This means
learning and helping agencies must start where the cities are, in organizational
and managerial terms, and not blindly offer one or another best practice without
tailoring it to local circumstances.
In general, each of the activities involved in learning makes a contribution.
Many help discovery in city business, some toward processing and validation across
silos. Proactive reformers make use of exercises of collectives. Actions of acquiring
knowledge can be mixed and matched in many ways for many purposes, and the
categories in Table 11.1 are not to be understood as tidy and mutually exclusive.
204 Secrets of knowing and accelerating change
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
Who does what?
An important part of work on urban learning will be to help the participating
cities develop a long-term learning process that allows learning to be built into
management culture, i.e., “embedded,” to employ (for purposes of connecting
to other disciplines) an already overused term. Not every community either can
or is willing to commit to the long term.
What can cities do?
A first step for cities is to make learning part of the mission of governance.
Make somebody responsible, set up a point person or documentation office, like
London’s intelligence unit. These are city-knowledge managers in that they
are the city scribes, who keep track of the most important lessons and objectives
of the city, manage an internal website for learning, identify and track the LUKAS
(local urban knowledge arenas) and keep an archive. This approach and these
tools are the bulwarks for getting past the breaks in continuity created by political
turnover.
Self-diagnosis may be needed once a learning initiative is established. Cities
small and large will need to take stock of how they stack up in the orders of learning.
Often, cities with few resources and low institutional capacity will be hovering
Turning the learning world upside down 205
Table 11.1 Sample tools for orders of learning
Tools of first order: Tools of second order: Tools of third order:
finding new processing knowledge clouds of trust;
knowledge internalizing knowledge
Research Responsible office Inter-group exchanges
Outbound city visits Own documentation Systematic study tours
Inward seminars Dissemination Team exercises and
retreats
Follow-up studies Follow-up studies Civic partnerships
Monitoring Monitoring and evaluation
Sessions at home
Twinning and mentoring
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
in the left-hand column of Table 11.1, acquiring knowledge, but not really making
the most of it. Individuals and small groups are learning every day, but the silos
and organizational entropy, the chasm between business and bureaucrat, can
slow transmission or block the processing of ideas. Taking stock of elements in
learning, such as those tools in the table, is a step most cities can take without
much outside help. Rich and poor, those recovering from calamity and those in
phase transition, all can benefit from canvassing and mapping out the sources of
knowledge inputs, as part of recovery as well as for long-term development.
Choose and develop a style
The style can be technical, informal, corporate or some other: choose one and
begin to build on it. All of the modalities discussed in Part III have been shown
to work, but each has drawbacks. The point is not to fit some category, but to
commit to a degree of activity, whether intensive, proactive or moderate, but
consistent, to address the areas of reform or change that are most pressing in
the city. Learning is not for learning’s sake, but to solve problems. An informal
style is probably the path of least resistance, noting that whatever the modality,
certain elements—written responsibilities, a mission, a staff—need to be in place.
Engaging private business and commercial interests stands out in all the cases.
The public sector cannot do learning alone, at least not the kind that leads to
good prospects for innovation and reform. To achieve this, the city’s political,
business and civil societies have to work together. This often means forging new
alliances, or changing the terms of present relationships, in order to enter a compact
that enables several world-views and sets of assumptions to be exposed to
and challenged by others. Leadership is a plural noun in learning; it is critical
to the collective creation of an innovative milieu.
Organize a learning program
Cities learn from other cities, so they should go to other cities; and if they go, they
should make it count. Learning is partly about knowing what needs to be discovered.
The learning program should pick those places or events—city visits,
intermediary knowledge centers, twinning, and conference grazing—to fit the
strategy. This means that the learning program should be organized in advance,
following the best practice of Seattle, and systematic in its strategy, so that documentation,
capturing the value added, and spotting opportunities can be moved
toward institutionalized form. Further suggestions about activities and events
are made in a subsequent section, below.
206 Secrets of knowing and accelerating change
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
Institutionalize knowledge
Both case and survey data show strong linkages among having an office,
department or unit on the one hand, and on the other, documenting lessons
and following up with learning events back home. Home meetings—seminars
and conferences organized specifically to discuss and explore learning—offer
the opportunity to deepen absorption and test new ideas. Organizational units
and internal learning activities are important mechanisms in building a consensus
of understanding on technologies, practices, issues and policies. Cases showed
time and again that invited guests from elsewhere with relevant expertise on
the topic at hand can enrich the process.
Work on the social capital
Building social capital may require outside help and some cities will need longterm
support, but it is a task that is within the reach of many cities, especially if
the initial task—the reason for learning—is tied to a project that is modest in
scale. Still, leadership of many kinds is needed. The case examples showed that
political, civic, business, university and neighborhood leadership all made contributions.
The key is that community actors must see their self-interest served and
feel they are connected to a larger endeavor.
For cities with more institutional capacity and deeper social capital, the challenge
focuses on the capacities and mechanisms involved in collective learning,
i.e., the area closer to the right-hand column in Table 11.1. The diagnostic work
centers on the inter-organizational and inter-network relationships that make
up the modern city. In many places, the first task will be to find ways to overcome
suspicion and sometimes ideological barriers that separate public from private
sector mentalities.
The linkages of learning and application must reach across many jurisdictions
and areas of interest in the city, as was illustrated by Bilbao. Many other divides
can impede the move to an innovative milieu. In working on its ba, cities have a
plethora of organizational, leadership and institutional literature from which to
draw. Van de Ven and Hargrave offer a synthesis of the literature and an organizational
framework that relate various bodies of theory to one another (Van de
Ven and Hargrave, 2004: 293).
Business, commerce and civil society
Just as cities must engage the business community and civil society, each sector
needs to reciprocate. For the corporate and business sector, the engagement
Turning the learning world upside down 207
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
cannot be merely a matter of corporate social responsibility or community good
will. The cases have shown that enlightened self-interest was the motivation
that drove the private sector to connect with city leadership. Cities have daily
contact with business interests in a myriad of ways; licensing, building, regulating,
and working on attracting investment. But too often these are conducted formally
and at arm’s length. One city manager told me with some pride that the city met
“at least once a year” with the Chamber of Commerce and business. These channels
need to be both more frequent and more varied, including joint activities
to discuss problems, engage in alliance-building exercises, and take part in
searching together for solutions.
Businesses, like individuals, have to see themselves as part of the community.
They should be asking themselves: What should my corporate action be to make
my city better? What can my company do to increase capacity? Often the barriers
of mutual mistrust or suspicion keep genuinely civic arrangements from being
formed between public leaders and the private sector. One step could be that
enterprises partner with a neutral third party, an independent actor such as a university,
foundation or neighborhood organization. Depending on the place and
circumstances, a neutral, “friend of the court” partner organization can straddle
the divide and help ease the natural tension between public and private sectors.
Global corporate world
The recent McKinsey report (Dobbs et al., 2011) showing middleweight cities
outpacing all others in terms of growth in purchasing power over the next 15
years underscores the reasons why we see corporations like Cisco, IBM, Philips
and Siemens investing in technologies and practices aimed at emerging city
markets. Designing better sensors, bringing information to consumers, allowing
managers to see a bigger picture to manage energy loads and traffic—all of these
contributions are just a beginning. Helping cities learn, and particularly bringing
new devices onto the market that help to build or reinforce the glue of trust in
learning and innovation, is a frontier that needs to be explored.
First, global and local business can focus on a place, a neighborhood, district
or development zone—as Cisco has done in Baltimore’s low-income neighborhood
near Johns Hopkins or in Barcelona’s innovation district, or IBM’s pilot in Dubuque,
or Google in Kansas City—where actions and discussions can focus on a wide
variety of needs, but actions can be concrete. Second, contributions can often be
made in connection with hardware and software that service that place—water,
transport, fiber optics or businesses. Third, make the commitment a long-term
one. Learning takes time, and partners have to stay engaged across political
208 Secrets of knowing and accelerating change
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
administrations. These are endeavors that require triple and quadruple bottom
lines.
Nations
Only a handful of nations have focused on horizontal exchange as a matter of
policy. India is a bellwether. Its PEARL (Peer Experience and Reflective Learning)
program, put together as a part of the Jawarhalal Nehru Urban Reform Mission,
makes financial resources available to foster city-to-city exchange in a variety of
specific topical areas (see box inset). Swedish SIDA developed a focus on intermediate
organizations (LUKAs, or local urban knowledge arenas).
Turning the learning world upside down 209
Box 11.1 Structured learning in the Jawarhalal Nehru Urban
Reform Mission (JNNURM)
In 2004, the government of India launched one of most ambitious urban
and municipal development financing and reform programs in the history
of the country. The program allocated a budget of US$16 billion to be
matched by state and local governments. Funds are contingent on certain
policy reforms and are to be dedicated to basic infrastructure, but significant
amounts are also included to bolster planning activities. More than 60 cities
were made eligible to apply for funding. Perhaps the most novel of the
activities under this program is the Peer Experience and Reflective Learning,
called PEARL. The JNNURM cities have been grouped into various categories,
such as industrial cities, heritage cities, trade and commercial cities, megacities,
etc. The experiences are to be compiled by one of the cities or a
designated institution as a knowledge manager and disseminated amongst
the others. The objective of the PEARL program is to create networks
between JNNURM cities for cross-learning and knowledge sharing on urban
reforms and city governance. JNNURM cities have been formed into several
subgroups according to the similarity of their socio-economic profiles,
complexities of urban problems and issues, size, and urban growth patterns.
Source: Sivaramakrishnan, 2011
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
Intermediate membership organizations
Membership organizations and professional associations can play very important
roles in helping members and constituent cities to learn. Most membership organizations
for cities already conduct learning programs and conferences. But none
to my knowledge has formed specific programs for learning cities. There is ample
scope to develop a focus on learning, good learners and typical lessons. Twinning,
mentoring and cluster exchanges all help to build basic tools and skills. But these
programs rarely focus on the critical nexus of public, corporate, business and
civic groups that need to work closely together to achieve a collective, common
understanding. Together, they must formulate a vision, develop and strengthen
alliances with partners, shape a learning strategy, and conduct knowledge acquisition
and management.
A supporting role of this kind complements the developmental agendas of
most intermediate organizations. Further, intermediate organizations can add
city learning to the agenda for lobbying national governments and international
organizations.
Intermediate organizations and development assistance agencies are also
well positioned to match up learner and teacher cities. United Cities and Local
Governments has begun this process with its mentoring cities program. The World
Bank Institute (WBI) launched a program called City Round, a series of sponsored
knowledge exchanges between cities. It quickly became apparent that matching
cities was a critical issue. Later, other parts of the World Bank picked up on the
idea of matching cities. International organizations with frequent and widespread
access could begin to create a roster for both “buyers” and “sellers” to make
that learning market more effective. Diagnostics tools need to be refined to help
cities get to know their own learning needs. Programs of city visits are brought
up again in the next section.
Overseas Development Assistance (ODA)—technical assistance
Capacity-building programs tailored to country needs are organized on a regional
or country basis and sometimes, but not always, complement efforts by the
development banks. Capacity building and training are offered in more than a
dozen areas, including the core areas of planning, shelter, tenure and finance.
Many new topics have been added as institutions emerge or morph. For instance,
Cities Alliance brought a new emphasis on upgrading and city-development
strategies, which both became mission-driven agendas in training and capacity
building. Almost no attention is given systematically to how urban institutions
210 Secrets of knowing and accelerating change
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
get strengthened and innovate in the long term, or how they learn, manage
knowledge, and put ideas to work in cities.
ODA financial assistance
The great bulk of capacity building and technical assistance (at least in monetary
volume) is carried along by lending or credits provided by international financial
institutions (IFIs). Capacity building is secondary to the primary objective of implementing
projects financed by loans and credits. Despite policy rhetoric to the
contrary, investments in infrastructure—and often a preoccupation with implementing
projects—crowd out attention to capacity and institution building.
Most development banks have a capacity-building arm (for instance, Asian
Development Bank Institute, Inter-American Development Bank Institute, WBI).
The urban focus of IFIs has widened and narrowed many times in the past several
decades, as we saw in Chapter 2. At one time, cities were only the places of
infrastructure investment. Some years later they were central to the creation of
an investment climate for job creation. Improving policy and professional skill,
and, more recently, professionalization of management, has been an enduring
issue through most of these variations.
Whatever the focus, finances for stand-alone capacity building as in the WBI
are woefully out of proportion to demonstrated need. Budgets for WBI urban
programs have been small (around US$500,000 annually) and therefore heavily
dependent on leveraging with partners and increasingly on distance learning. For
instance, WBI’s partnership with Monterrey Tech in Mexico has mutual advantages.
WBI content enriches Monterrey Tech. With the broadcast power of
Monterrey Tech, WBI reaches up to several orders of magnitude more participants
than it could on its own. By forcing a dependence on virtual learning, WBI dramatically
increases the reach of course offerings, but dilutes the impact of learning
and misses the essence of building a learning environment.
New roles for development agencies
The growing shadow economy of exchange reveals a looming opportunity cost
for international development agencies that have a mandate for capacity building.
The shadow economy suggests the viability of alternative or parallel learning
mechanisms. A large number of cities in the North and the South—and a growing
number of knowledge agents, the specialized agencies and NGOs—have gained
considerable experience in structuring and transferring knowledge to other cities.
Development agencies might well find that their comparative advantage lies
Turning the learning world upside down 211
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
less in direct provision of knowledge and more in the licensing and management
of high-performing cities as knowledge agents.
The means of finance for this learning strategy already exist. Most investment
lending (and some adjustment loans) from the World Bank and sister organizations
includes technical assistance or capacity components that typically amount
to around 10 percent of loan value. It may be cost effective for the banks to
concentrate on structuring and regulating a market for urban learning and to
develop knowledge-management expertise in cities. These are activities for which
loan funds could be used by borrowers to purchase knowledge from cities like
those proactive learners that already possess it. Rather than international organizations
concentrating knowledge and best practice, then sending it on a round
trip back to cities, they could be leveraging their expertise by regulating a market
that is already in bloom.
In this scenario, international organizations, with help from associations,
could be setting criteria for licensed vendors, cities and LUKAS, and others, holding
them to high and monitored standards, and letting loan funds finance the knowledge
acquisition. Selected, proven and willing cities could deliver the capacity
building. Of course cities supplying the expertise would have to meet performance
criteria, be monitored, and retain certification—all functions that IFIs could
provide or manage.
National and international partners
All of the proactive learners discussed in this book reshuffled the relationship
between and among principal actors—public, private, civic and academic. Each
of the cases found ways to engage key groups in a collective effort, putting individual
objectives aside in the interests of the community as whole. For strategic
restructuring, the public sector is important but far from sufficient, and new tools
and techniques are needed to help cities acquire the skills of alliance building.
Many programs to encourage and develop leadership are already in operation,
for example, academies of management and leadership in the US. But few, if any,
focus on alliance building for purposes of expanding the intelligence functions
of cities. Fewer still in emerging nations offer a place of learning for community
and civic leaders, including but not confined to elected leadership.
A quasi-academic setting allows the leadership elite time to escape daily
pressures, observe successful practices and study the fatal flaws of failed efforts,
and also to spend quality time building relationships with natural partners. Such
a “space” could be created locally (a nearby retreat) or regionally. Recent
leadership programs such as DARE (Decision, Actions, Results), crafted by the
212 Secrets of knowing and accelerating change
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
WBI and offered in the Lee Kuan Yew School of Public Policy in the National
University of Singapore, are getting closer to addressing collective learning.
City leaders are rarely able to devote more than a few days to these purposes.
Occasional longer encounters would allow exposure of local communities to other
groups from cohort cities with similar aspirations. The proposition would be costly,
but global and regional financing from public and private sources may be available,
especially when private industry sees enlightened self-interest is at play (and
proper arm’s-length arrangements are put into place to avoid conflicts of interest).
Turning the learning world upside down 213
Box 11.2 Learning cycles for cities—hypothetical program
What would be the nature and scope of a learning program for a hypothetical
city that wishes to achieve sustainable learning? Typical but carefully
selected components can be packaged into a long-term program useful
for many purposes. The core idea of the cycle of learning is twofold. First,
to establish and reaffirm the nature of the problem in the city, recognize
that the city will be engaged in a long-term effort, and accept that the aim
is to achieve a more sustainable development pathway. Second, the cycle
helps to integrate learning internally, among the major players in a given
city, and externally, with counterpart peers from other cities. The program
would need to be agreed in advance and managed as part of any project.
Four typical learning activities might be included.
1 Conferences and seminars (knowledge exchange on policy and vision):
More formal, structured meetings are suited to explore approaches to
planning and planning frameworks—for instance, regional planning;
institutional coordination; planning theory; and analytical tools, like
surveys and forecasting—areas of work that are either abstract or as
yet not widely practiced in the city.
2 City tours and visits: These are suited to areas of work for which frameworks
are understood and for which practical and hands-on experiences
are possible to observe, for instance, treatment of transport corridors,
redevelopment zones, cultural heritage in the built environment, and
living heritage, as well as land use controls. Visiting on-site and peerto-
peer learning is important because visits allow participants—planners,
businesspeople, neighborhood activists and technicians—to see first
hand the approaches and techniques used in world-class cities and, as
we saw in Seattle, to interact with each other, to build a sense of
togetherness and team spirit.
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
214 Secrets of knowing and accelerating change
3 City studios for working groups: These events would bring international
experts for stays in the city of sufficient duration to allow practical work
and achieve specific solutions to specific problems, such as site designs,
neighborhood plans, small-scale transportation solutions, and land use.
They could be followed by project-specific learning integrated into work
programs. (It might also be possible, and is certainly desirable, to link
these projects with training institutions as a way to modernize graduate
programs and provide credit for on-the-job planners toward eventual
further qualifications.) As with the study tours, technical issues should
be balanced with activities to build a sense of cohesiveness among
participants from technical, political, and business backgrounds.
4 Technical exchanges of days and weeks (some extended into short
courses): Selected analysts engage in technical exchanges to study and
gain proficiency in use of analytical tools like surveys, geographical
information systems (GIS), simulation, scenario development, and other
planning techniques.
A national or regional conference can help to set the stage, validate the
objective, and reaffirm the commitment in the city as well as in regional
and national centers. This visioning conference would educate and mobilize
the public and local and national policy makers about the importance of
urban learning and the stakes, as well as the activities of cities in other regions
of the world. The idea is to convey a sense of movement and purpose.
A goal-setting and benchmarking exercise would follow and set the
stage for an international city tour to study the best examples of practice
in a given field. Parallel working groups within each pilot city would then
set about the work on policy and practice toward implementing key steps
to achieve the goals.
In year two, work groups would have encounters with world or regional
experts working on the same or similar subjects. Each city would then review
its goals and benchmarks and toward the end of year three present its
progress in each area to a regional or international conference, along with
peer cities. Parallel work groups would continue to make progress in year
four and beyond. Further technical workshops or clinics would help to solve
specific problems. A small national conference would complete the cycle in
year five.
This hypothetical learning sequence is intended to illustrate both the
stages and the various mechanisms of learning. Each of the key institutions
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
City readiness to learn
Whether or not a pre-packaged program like the one just described is to be
undertaken, cities should know whether they are ready to engage in learning.
At least two factors are critical. First, the motivation for learning must be plainly
visible and sustainable. Cities that can show a record of effort—of past actions,
committed resources, diagnostics, pending trouble over economic base or natural
calamity—would fit this criterion. Second, community stakeholders beyond
elected officials must be engaged. This criterion is essential not just to bridge
the political term of office of elected officials but also to develop a sense of
common purpose.
Turning the learning world upside down 215
in a city would be included in the design and implementation of the multiyear
and multi-city program. Each would also be exposed to peers—both
other pilots and a wider range of cities where programs or best practice
have been developed. In addition, local or regional educational institutions
would also be included, especially those that offer postgraduate degrees
in public urban policy, environmental and urban planning, urban design,
transport planning, economics, land use planning and other sub-specialties.
Team
formation
International
conference
WGs
International
study
tour(s)
Year 1:
Launch and
visioning
conference
Team formation,
goal setting,
benchmarking
Year 2:
Parallel work
Work group groups, national
seminars
(international)
WGs
review
goals
Year 4: Parallel
work groups,
national
WG
seminars
Team(s)
review
Year 3: Team review
of goals and
benchmarks
Figure 11.1 Hypothetical sequence of events for city learning and exchange
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
Some literature, including some of my own work (Campbell and Fuhr, 2004),
marks the importance of individual leaders, especially in adopting innovation.
Yet none of the cases covered in the book suggests that an outstanding visionary
leader or champion is indispensable in learning. Outstanding leaders can accomplish
great things. A well-respected leader can get the ball rolling in learning.
But individuals are not sufficient to carry the weight of a long-term program in
urban learning. Not only should leadership be a collective noun, leadership elites
should also be widely based in the community and exhibit features of shared
values and interests. Nothing showed this more clearly than the city clouds of
trust in the cases of Chapter 6, where linkages of trust revealed hidden actors
who were otherwise not necessarily community leaders, and certainly not elected
heads of local government.
Perhaps the most important quality of leadership is the ability to see across
the many variegated and often contentious groups in a city and not lose sight of
the common ground that learning can represent for many of them. Great skill is
needed to manage networks in situations where, as Crosby puts it, “no one is in
charge” (Crosby and Bryson, 2005: Chapter one), but which have a coordinating
influence on the many networks that make up city learning machinery.
Selected areas for research
Development institutions and knowledge brokers—for instance, NGOs, the EU,
regional associations and universities—are increasingly focused on documenting
and extracting lessons and synthesizing best practice, and then gauging the
factors of cost and outcomes of city learning. Several key topics are singled out
here for further work.
Efficiency of learning
A market for information exchange forms and keeps operating if participants are
getting benefit from it. Cities reduce the costs and the risks of innovation and
reform by seeing what has worked elsewhere and gauging whether it will work
in their own circumstances. In this way, learning cuts the costs of information.
But are there more efficient ways to exchange information?
A first step is to conduct comparative analysis of cities engaging in various
kinds of knowledge exchange, horizontal visits or other types, including those
suggested in Chapter 4, to evaluate value added in both content of knowledge
and in formation of innovative milieu. Chapter 8 opened the way with a post
216 Secrets of knowing and accelerating change
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
hoc look at participants in Seattle’s study missions. Evidence does indicate that
tighter bonds are formed, but the survey did not cover enough about content of
knowledge. Future work needs to understand a baseline of traveler knowledge
and outcomes in terms of immediate learning as well as longer-term application.
Comparative work could then explore variables—of cities themselves or the
categories of knowledge they seek—that shape or determine outcomes.
Evaluation experience in the World Bank Institute attempts to gauge outcomes
of different modalities of learning by survey of individual participants from many
different agencies (Liu et al., 2006). The WBI organizes thousands of learning
events each year in regional, national and local forums. Only about 60 events
per year are aimed at officials from municipal governments. Of these, a small
handful (e.g., some core courses) is organized for specific cities or regions. Most
learning events involve high-level policy makers as well as middle-level
practitioners, and evaluations are performed regularly. Periodically, in-depth
follow-up studies are also conducted.
Findings from these reviews indicate that, in general, and not referring specifically
to cities or city groups, the most effective learning in strategic areas and
approaches to problems, as in the case of our type-one and type-two cities, is
when action planning of some kind is performed and when higher-level personnel
are involved. Reviews for specific countries reaffirm these points and also indicate
the importance of a series of events and of engaging the client partner in the
design of the events. One central question is whether and how these hands-on
exercises—i.e., action planning or team efforts—have been or can be extended
into a wider circle in a specific city, and whether, when sustained in a consistent
way, they lead to the creation of an innovative milieu.
Virtual learning
We know that the power of the web for signaling alerts and making connections
is unparalleled. But can it function to create or support an innovative milieu?
Knowledge economies make widespread use of virtual connectivity and there is
little doubt that connecting across the web adds to the productivity of information
exchange. But does it yield an innovative climate for the interpersonal exchange
of values and the formation of trust? This and other related questions can be
answered empirically and deserve to be the subject of serious tests. Distance
learning, journalism, blogs, electronic bulletin boards and web pages are useful;
many are meeting a market test. But often they are tools of the first order, not
the third order, of learning. Personal, face-to-face connection is the type that
has the best chance of carrying a place beyond smart cities.
Turning the learning world upside down 217
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
Clouds of trust
Analytical tools of social network analysis are well suited to explore the degree
of connectedness of practitioner or manager groups in cities. The case evidence
introduced in Part III barely scratches the surface, but it is enough to beg the
question. To what extent can measures of coherence in networks of city leaders
be used to evaluate city leadership, to identify gaps in communication, to serve
as a guide to remedy fractured communities and to predict outcomes? These
and other research questions—for instance, comparative analysis, both horizontally
across cities and longitudinally within a city over time—are easily subject to
exploration and verification.
Outcomes of lessons
The cases in this book have only scratched the surface of the learning process,
particularly as regards outcomes. Further, we may have been scratching in the
wrong places. More careful documentation about learning experiences—gauging
some of the trajectory of learning, monitoring the process, for instance of
validation, absorption and application—would throw more light on how learning
works in loosely organized systems like cities. What can be said about timetables?
Do typical shortcuts and detours appear? Many lessons have been learned
repeatedly but in separate circumstances, and tracking “policy migration” as Kevin
Ward and colleagues have done would help to gain insight on typical conditions
and reactions (Ward, 2006).
In addition to a focus on policy in changing places, we also need to look at
changing policy holding the place constant. This requires a longer-term perspective
on how learning in a specific place plays out over time. Documentation of
the twists and turns in the learning path would help to understand where typical
problems arise and how to remedy them. For instance, the experience in Curitiba
showed how IPPUC adapted its mission to suit the changing political climate. As
more populist administrations shifted the focus of investment from infrastructure
to social programs, IPPUC began to emphasize its data-management tools, a
robust GIS system and extensive neighborhood archive on social and economic
conditions. IPPUC survived many changes of this kind. Can we learn other lessons
from its successes?
218 Secrets of knowing and accelerating change
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
The new urban age: cities getting to know themselves
The pace of exchange for learning and many other aspects seems to be accelerating.
Organizational tissue consisting of city-to-city relationships—national
associations and international confederations—has grown quickly in the past few
decades. This book has focused on learning exchange in policy and practice of
the day-to-day business of cities. In recent decades, the agenda of concerns has
been expanding—poverty, urban spread, metropolitan governance, environmental
sustainability, climate change, corruption and violence.
We can surmise from the cases studies that as cities embark on a pathway to
structured learning, they get to know themselves. Many cities are already past the
dawn of recognition that the protective cloak of trade restrictions is gone and not
likely to return. They are exposed to new pressures to distinguish themselves from
neighbors and competitors. They are beginning to take steps to distinguish themselves
with slogans, brands, business plans, and reform. No example is better than
Bilbao positioning itself as the center of city learning, or Singapore as the go-to
source for talent and managerial expertise in Asian urban affairs.
As self-recognition takes hold in the wider world, cities may be expected to
see their mutual interests more clearly. The process is not a trivial matter because
of the many moving parts in political and social forces in cities. As collective
leadership in cities gets more broadly engaged with itself, they come to see the
commonalities in contradictions as well as the dormant synergies waiting to
be put into motion. Ten years ago, I was struck by the “aha” experience in a
room full of mayors. At the closing session on problems of cities, one of the mayors
declared, “I see that I am not alone.” His discovery was acknowledged and welcomed
by his peers with a round of applause. A similar insight underpins initiatives
in cities like Bilbao and Singapore to deploy a determined strategy to be hubs of
learning and policy advice.
These emerging initiatives may be the bellwethers of the most important
and lasting products of moving beyond smart cities. As the city-urbanist movement
presses forward, cities turn more inward, reflecting on their growing selfawareness
and their new role in global affairs. Our learning perspective has shown
cities engaging each other, exchanging ideas, examining policies, and finding
good practices. The problems are often common, and the solutions protean. The
hunting and gathering of ideas is also spawning institutional layers nationally,
regionally and globally to facilitate the exchange, as cities find it convenient to
band together for both learning and self-interest. The accretion process may
be leading to an entirely new urban age in which cities begin to exercise their
common knowledge and common muscle in urban and global development.
Turning the learning world upside down 219
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
References
Campbell, T. and H. Fuhr (2004). Leadership and innovation in subnational government.
Case studies from Latin America (WBI Development Series), World Bank Institute,
Washington, DC.
Crosby, B. C. and J. M. Bryson (2005). Leadership for the common good: tackling public
problems in a shared-power world, Jossey-Bass, New York.
Czarniawska, B. (2002). A tale of three cities—or the glocalization of city management,
Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK.
Dobbs, R., S. Smit, J. Remes, J. Manyika, C. Roxburgh, and A. Restrepo (2011). Urban world:
Mapping the economic power of cities, McKinsey & Company, 49pp.
Liu, C., S. Jha and T. Yang (2006) “What influences the outcomes of WBI’s learning programs
—evidence from WBIEG’s evaluations,” World Bank Institute Evaluation Series EG06-
17, p. 37.
Marris, P. (1974). Loss and change, Pantheon, New York.
Sivaramakrishnan, K. (2011). Re-visioning Indian cities. The urban renewal mission, Sage,
New Delhi.
Van de Ven, A. H. and T. J. Hargrave (2004). “Social, technical, and institutional change: a
literature review and synthesis,” in M. S. Poole and A. H. Van de Ven (eds), Handbook
of organizational change and innovation, Oxford University Press, New York,
pp. 259–303.
Ward, K. (2006). “‘Policies in motion,’ urban management and state restructuring: the translocal
expansion of business improvement districts,” International Journal of Urban and
Regional Research, 30, pp. 54–75.
220 Secrets of knowing and accelerating change
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
Appendix 1 Features of learning by type
Four main features are important in each type of learning. First is the purpose of
learning. One key question is whether the city, understood in a very broad sense,
agrees on a problem. Second is the nature of the entity responsible for learning.
At a minimum, it is important to understand whether an entity, an agent, has
been identified and the agent and mandate are suited for the job. Is it climate
change, disaster preparedness, strategic planning? These have distinctly different
requirements in technical, managerial and political terms.
Third is the learning style, i.e., the mechanism of learning. This refers to the
extent to which the city or its agency is active in pursuing knowledge or is in a
passive, receptive mode where knowledge and information flows depend on
forces outside the city. Fourth is whether policies are in place to sustain the
learning process and whether these are buttressed by their own capacity building.
Each of these aspects is reviewed for the five types of cases in Chapter 4.
Table A1.1 Summary features of learning types
Feature of Type 1 and Type 3— Type 4— Type 5—
learning 2—cities and binary pairing clusters networks
agencies
1. Why learn?
Purpose Crisis resolution, Specific policy Norms and Issues of
economic issues, best standards of standard best
transformation, practice practice in class practice in
competitiveness techniques of issues (e.g. municipal
heritage, government
reform)
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
222 Appendices
Table A1.1 continued
Feature of Type 1 and Type 3— Type 4— Type 5—
learning 2—cities and binary pairing clusters networks
agencies
Subject and Approaches and Improvement in Conventions, Varies widely;
focus strategies, management, standards, typical
benchmarks, budgeting, techniques problems of
elite awareness procurement, within class of local
etc. subjects governments
2. Agency
Mandate Specifically Contiguous Extends or Contiguous
defined, long- with local enhances typical with local
term strategy government municipal government
mandate mandate
Leadership Strong, Strong, less Strong, Moderate and
(individual/ collective collective moderately variable
collective) collective
Formal/ Mixed, yes Mostly formal, Formal, varies Formal, no
informal, yes
action plan
Community Yes Limited Varies Limited
engagement
3. Learning
modalities
Active/passive, Active, imports Active, imports Mixed, mostly Passive, mostly
source of and outbound and outbound imports imports
learning
Regularity, Regular, long Regular, short Varies, medium Irregular, short
term, term, yes term, no term, varies term, no
follow-up
Core group Large, high, Moderate, Varies, Varies, varies,
size, level, strong medium to moderate, varies
and bonding high, medium medium
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
Appendix 1 223
Feature of Type 1 and Type 3— Type 4— Type 5—
learning 2—cities and binary pairing clusters networks
agencies
4. Capacitybuilding
Sustained Substantial Moderate Moderate Little
policy
guidance
Investment Substantial Moderate Moderate Little
in learning
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
Appendix 2 List of surveyed cities
City Pop. Proactive Reforms
(million) 1 = yes 1 = many
2 = no 2 = some
0 = DK 3 = few
Amman 2.8 1 1
Athens, US 0.5 2 1
Atlanta, US 0.5 0 1
Bangkok 6.3 1 1
Barcelona 1.6 1 1
Berlin 4.2 1 2
Bogota 8.6 2 1
Brussels Region 1.8 1 2
Buenos Aires, DF 2.5 1 2
Cebu City 0.9 2 1
Charlotte 0.71 1 1
Colombo 0.65 2 2
Da Nang 3.5 1 1
Dakar Region 1.1 2 2
Dubai 1 0 1
Hanoi 0.7 2 3
Honolulu 0.75 1 2
Hyderabad 10 2 1
Incheon 2.5 2 2
Istanbul 8 1 2
Istanbul Metro 12.5 2 1
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
Appendix 2 225
Kathmandu 0.671 1 2
Kobe 1.5 2 3
Madrid 3.3 1 1
Manila City 2.5 1 1
Masbate 0.05 2 3
Mashhad 2.4 1 2
Melbourne 3.9 1 3
Mexico, DF 10 2 2
Mexico Metro 13 2 1
Naga City 0.1 1 2
Paris Region 11.6 1 1
Pateros 0.075 2 3
Phnom Penh 1.4 2 1
Portland 0.87 2 1
Salt Lake City 0.5 2 1
San Salvador 1.5 1 1
Santa Cruz, Bolivia 1.5 2 1
Seattle 0.7 2 1
Seoul Metro 23.9 1 2
Stockholm City 0.8 2 1
Stockholm Metro 1.9 2 3
Surabaya 3 1 3
Tabriz 1.4 2 3
Tehran 12.7 2 3
Turin 0.58 2 1
Toronto 5.5 1 1
Ulaanbaatar 1.1 1 3
Note: Some cities provided incomplete data, others submitted redundant responses. For these
reasons the total number of respondents to the survey (53) does not always equal the number
presented in tables and figures.
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
Appendix 3 Field method
Data gathering followed a roughly similar procedure in each of the case study
cities. Nominations of persons to be interviewed were made by a panel
representing public, private and civic leaders and observers, each of whom were
associated with a particular project or issue in the city, for instance, a strategic
plan, land use issue, or local economic development. In each case, the nomination
criteria included: (a) persons who have a reputation for civic-mindedness; (b)
had played a visible role in public decision-making, whether representing
themselves or their place of work or affiliation.
From the nominations, I selected nominees more or less randomly from each
of three domains: public sector; private enterprise; and civic, including neighborhood
groups, NGOs and universities. The core group in each city consisted
of about 20 persons. Most selected persons appeared on more than one list of
nominators.
Face-to-face interviews were conducted following a semi-structured format.
Most interviews lasted between 60 and 90 minutes; one lasted more than four
hours. Topics covered the interviewee’s role in the community; his or her perspective
on innovation and change as represented by a specific project or reform
undertaken by the city; the sources of good ideas and innovations in relation to
that change; and names of others whom the interviewee regards as (a) trustworthy
and (b) active like himself or herself. “Sources” in the tables refer to
interviewees; “references” refer to those persons named by interviewees.
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
Appendix 4 Timeline of IPPUC in Curitiba
1943 Agache Plan created
1965 IPPUC created
1966 Master Plan approved
1967 Creation of pedestrian mall in city center
1972 Law extends IPPUC remit to include continuous planning
1977 IPPUC helps to coordinate interdepartmental procedures
1978 Integrated transport network devised; World Bank agreement on
loan signed by mayor
1978–1982 Neighborhood bus terminals created
1981 Management system developed to track public works
1982 Change of political administration
1983 IPPUC downgraded to municipal department; objectives shifted to
social concerns
1985 IPPUC participates in the national census for the city; transportation
vouchers introduced
1987 Further personnel reforms; technicians begin to leave
1988 IPPUC becomes advisory arm of the office of mayor
1989 Lerner elected to office of mayor
1992 Curitiba Resolution, one of the founding documents for Agenda 21
of the UN Habitat meeting in Rio de Janeiro
1996–1997 Revitalization of the historic quarter
2000 Intensification of public participation and linking city to citizen
2003 Protection of Heritage Assets
2005 Climate Change
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
Appendix 5 IPPUC organization chart
Figure A5.1 IPPUC organization chart
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
Abdullah II, King 142
Abuja (Nigeria) 35
adaptive learning 17–18
Administrative Staff College of India (ASCI)
77
Agache, Alfred 126–7
agency 11, 69, 197–8
Agenda 21 62, 64
air pollution, indoor 24
Allentown 12
Amman (Jordan) 4, 7, 124, 141, 177, 178,
195
Amman Institute (AI) 141, 145
Amsterdam 58, 153; biking in 115, 164, 175
Arab Cities and Towns 33
Areso, Ibon 151
Arzua Pereira, Ivo, Mayor of Curitiba 127,
131
Asian Development Bank 92
“assemblages” 4
atrophy of learning 188
ba, city as 44, 45, 46, 163, 170–1, 193, 199,
200, 204, 207
Baltimore 4, 150, 208; visits from other
cities to 76
banks 25
Barcelona 6, 9, 58, 59, 72, 104, 153, 154,
164, 169, 171–2, 177, 195, 197, 208;
22@Barcelona 172; city-to-city
exchanges 172–5; leadership in 189–90;
Olympic Games (1992) 171; as source of
knowledge 107; talent 195–6; visits
from other cities to 76
Bearing Point 7, 142
Belfast 153
benchmarking 8, 9, 70
Berlin 6
Berlin wall, fall of 33
Bertelsmann Cities of Change 65
best practice 8, 9–10, 62, 70–1
best practices awards 67
BikePortland.org 116
Bilbao 6, 10, 46, 55, 60, 70, 102, 172, 177,
179, 193, 195, 207, 219; corporate
learning 147, 148–53, 159, 160;
governance 196; Guggenheim Museum
10, 150–1; internal and external
learning 149–52; Metropoli-30 (BM-30)
102, 128, 148, 149, 150, 151–2, 152–3,
157; motivation for learning 68; Rai
2000 140, 152; Strategic Revitalization
Plan 149, 152
bird flu 36
Birk, Mia 117
Birmingham 32
Index
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
Bloomberg, Mayor of New York 6
Boeing 6, 8, 10, 58, 68, 159
Bogota 6, 7
Bolivia: national participation law 1994 31
Boston-Washington corridor 34
Brasilia 22, 35
Brazilian Constitution (1988) 31
Brazilian Institute of Statistics (IBGE) 136,
137
Bresso, Mercedes 107
Bristol 58, 153
British Committee for the Study of
Municipal Institutions (BCSMI) 19
British Council 153
Budapest 124, 142
Buenos Aires 4
business 207–8
C-40 programs 62
calamity, failure to learn and 188–9
Calthorp, Peter 116
Canberra 35
capacity building 33, 42, 44, 184, 185, 210,
211
Cape Town 4
carbon footprint 24, 62
Carson, Rachel: Silent Spring 25
Castellani, Valentino, Mayor of Turin 102,
103, 107, 108, 167
Centre for C2C Cooperation, Seville 33
Chandigarh (India) 22
Charlotte, North Carolina 119–20, 121–2,
164–70, 179; Chamber of Commerce
173, 175, 176; city-to-city exchanges
172–5; cloud of trust 121; informal
networks and 164, 166, 167; leadership
changes 190; network density 165;
Odell plan (1966) 163; origins of
learning style 162–3
Chiamparino, Sergio, Mayor of Turin 102,
104–5, 109
Chiang Mai (Thailand) 189
Chicago 6, 115
Cisco 203, 208
Cities Alliance 210
Cities of the Future 153
citizen participation 33
city economies 6, 14
City Links (ICMA) 61, 68
city visits: Asia-centric pattern 88; content
of learning 91–3; effort devoted to
learning 90–1; Euro-centric pattern 89;
geographic patterns 82–6; global
perspectives on 83; hidden knowledge
exchange 95; learning as building
blocks to innovative milieu 94–5;
modalities of learning 93; North–South
exchange 85–6; peripheral clusters 84;
visitors and hosts by population size
87–90
CITYNET 65, 77
city-to-city exchanges 9, 33; frequency of
185; timelines 26–7
civic violence 35
civil society 207–8
climate change 24, 36, 68, 107, 185
“clouds of trust” 11–13, 110, 163–4, 168,
193, 199, 200, 218; Charlotte 121;
Portland 119; Turin 164–70
clusters 184, 199, 200
collective learning 3, 4–5, 41, 42, 207
Colombia: decentralization laws 30
Colombo 187
commerce 207–8
Commonwealth of Local Governments 30
communications theory 41
competitiveness 70
Conference on the Human Environment,
Stockholm 1972 25
conflict resolution 44
congestion charging 80
content of learning 193–7
Copenhagen 6, 115, 117, 122, 175
corporate social responsibility 208
corruption 31, 36
Council of Europe 63, 67
230 Index
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
Council of European Municipalities (CEM)
32, 65
creativity 44, 46
Crutchfield, Ed 119
Curitiba, Brazil 6, 44, 46, 55, 69, 72, 122,
124–40, 177, 178, 179, 195, 218; Agache
Plan 126–7; bus system 7–8, 24;
development 124–6; green spaces 24;
Integrated Transportation Network
(RIT) 135; Master Plan 127–8, 129, 130,
143–4; “trash that is not trash”
program 137; see also IPPUC
Da Nang 4
Dakar 25
Deakin, Elizabeth 116
decentralization/democratization 27, 29,
31, 32
decentralized cooperation 32–3
Delhi 6
democracy, spread of 29
density of cities 34
Denver 60, 175
development agencies 211–12
disasters, natural and man-made 188
distance learning 72, 217
Dortmund 32
double-loop learning 42
Dubai International Award for Best
Practice 67
Dublin 153
Dubuque 208
Dusseldorf 153
Eisenhower, Dwight 32
embeddedness 12
employment, migration and 21–2
Empresa Brasileira de Transporte Urbano
(EBTU) 134
entrepreneurial urbanism 43, 152
environmental change 24–5, 189
EUROCITIES 65, 107
Europe: municipalist movement 18–20;
population 18; social programs 19;
voting rights 19
European Union: Lomé Convention 32–3;
Seventh Framework Programme 157
explicit knowledge 44
expression of voice 44
Fabians 18
feedback systems 42
Fiat motors 102, 103, 104, 105, 109
Ficinski, Lubomir 127, 133
first-order learning 71–2, 193
Ford Foundation 23, 30
Foundation for the Carolinas 120
Franco, General 104, 154
Frankfurt 32
Friedrich Ebert Foundation 30
Friedrich Naumann Foundation 30
garden city associations 20
General Motors 109
Genoa 104
German Marshall Fund (US) 173, 176
Glasgow 104, 150, 164, 173
Global Business Network (GBN) 151
global corporations 208–9
global demographic transition 21–2
globalization 17, 18, 27, 29–30, 31, 32, 43
GMF 115
Goldschmidt, Mayor of Portland 113
Google 208
governance 35, 196; of natural resources
45; style, capacity and 44
“grazing” 184, 185, 198
Great War 20
greenhouse gases 36–7, 64
Greenlight Greater Portland 114
Guggenheim Museum 10
Hanseatic League 17
Helsinki 171
historic preservation 13
HIV/AIDS 36
Index 231
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
Ho Chi Minh City 124, 142, 145; Institute
for Development Studies (IDS) 142
Hong Kong 6, 58, 153
horizontal cooperation 14, 33
Hué, Vietnam 63
Hurricane Katrina 189
IBM 203, 208
ICLEI see Agenda 21
import substitution 30
India: Peer Experience and Reflective
Learning (PEARL) program 209
indoor air pollution 24
information and communications
technologies 202
information flow and control 45
information technology 31
innovative milieu 43, 44, 82, 102
insecurity 35
institution-building 42, 72
institutional capacity building 32, 70, 184,
185
institutional process 11
institutionalization 20, 33, 72, 130, 140,
207
Instituto de Pesquisa y Planejamento
Urbano de Curitiba—Curitiba Institute
for Urban Planning and Research see
IPPUC
intermediate membership organizations
210
intermediate-size cities: economic growth
and consumer demand 28–9; numbers
of 14, 27; physical separation 28
internal capacity, failure to learn and 188
International City and County Managers
Association (ICMA) 61, 62, 78; City Links
program 61
international city, notion of 20
International Council on Local
Environmental Initiatives 64
international financial institutions (IFIs)
211
International Garden City and Town
Planning Association (IGCTPA) 21
International Institute of Administrative
Sciences (IIAS) 151
International Network for Marketing and
Urban Development 151
International Statistical Institute (ISI) 151
International Union of Local Authorities
(IULA) 20, 23–4, 33
IPPUC 124–5, 126, 142, 143, 145, 178, 218;
coordinating/managing public works
135–6; environmental and social issues
136–8; flood control and parks 139–40;
integration of land use and public
transport 133–6; Organization Chart
228; phases of development 130–40;
profile and governance 128–9; roots of
learning in 129–30; social innovations
137–8; timelines of 227; transport
system (1972–83) 133; urban reform
(1967–72) 131–3
Italy: dissolution of association of
municipalities (1925) 20; Network of
Strategic Cities 107
Jawarhalal Nehru Urban Reform Mission
209
job creation 36
Juàrez 124, 140–1, 178, 179, 183, 188–9,
195; drug wars 189; Instituto Municipal
de Investigación y Planeación (IMIP—
Municipal Institute for Planning and
Research) 140–1, 144, 145; leadership
changes 190
Kansas City 208
Kennedy School of Government
Innovations 66
knowledge acquisition 4
knowledge gathering 11
knowledge management 72
knowledge, institutionalization of 207
Kobe, Japan 13, 188
232 Index
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
Konrad Adenauer Foundation 30
KPMG 151
land use planning 36
large-cities 17, 21, 27, 28, 31
Latin America: decentralization (1980–90s)
28; demographic shifts in 22
leadership 69, 70; changes in 189–90;
qualities 215–16
Leadership in Energy and Environmental
design (LEED) 156
League of Nations 20
learning: approaches to 204; definition 4;
efficiency of 216–17; elements of
197–8; failure 186–7, 188–93; mechanics
of 70–1; orders of 199, 200, 204, 205; as
part of governance 205; smart cities
and 5–6; types 199, 200, 204, 221–3
learning cities movement 47
Learning Communities 47
learning economies 42
learning exchanges, number of 78–80
learning modalities 197
learning organizations 43
learning programs: hypothetical 213–15;
organizing 206
Lee, Bill 119
Leeds 32
Lerner, Jaime, Mayor of Curitiba 124, 127,
131, 133
licensing and permits 36
Lille 32
Lille Metropole 63
Lima, Peru 10; barriadas 23; public housing
23
Local Government Information Network
(LOGIN) 66–7
London 4, 10, 35, 58, 153, 192; Economic
Intelligence Unit 72; visits from other
cities to 76
Los Angeles 6
LUKAS (local urban knowledge arenas)
205, 209, 212
Lyon 104, 124, 173, 197
Maani, Omar 142
Madrid 153, 172
mandate 69
Maragall, Pasqual, Mayor of Barcelona 107
Maus, Jonathan 116–17
McCall, Governor of Portland 113
McColl, Hugh 119
McKinsey 7, 203
mega-cities 4
membership organizations, intermediate
210
mentoring 200
Merco-ciudades 65
Metropolis 65, 77
metropolitanization 27
Mexico: Monterrey Tech 211
migration, urban 21
Milan 104
Minneapolis-St Paul: Twin Cities Metro
Region 196
Monde Bilingue 32
Monitor Group 7
Montreal 35
Moses, Robert 114
motivation for learning 215–16
Muangklang, Thailand 189
Mumbai, India 188, 192; leadership 190,
191–2; Mumbai 2020 192; slums 192
Munich 58, 59, 153, 154
municipal institutions, activity between 19
municipal international cooperation (MIC)
41
municipalist movement, early history of
18–20
Naga City 187
nation-states 9, 31, 32
National League of Cities 57
natural hazards preparation 24
Neal, Rolfe 119
neighborhood upgrading 13
Index 233
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
NEK (not enough knowledge) cities 198
networks 65–6, 197–8; city 46; as learning
tools 45; trust and 11–13
New Orleans 189
New York 6, 192
Nickels, Greg, Mayor of Seattle 155–6
non-governmental organizations (NGOs)
23, 24, 33, 62–3, 65, 154, 211
Nonaka, Ikujiro 163
Normandy Basin Authority, France 139–40
OECD 47
Olympic Games (2006) 60
Open Society Institute 67; LOGIN websites
66
OPENCities 152–3
openness 198
orders of learning 199, 200, 204; tools for
205
Organization of World Heritage Cities
(OWHC) 63
organizational learning 3, 42, 43–4, 45;
flexibility in structure 176–7;
knowledge and innovation 179;
learning and knowledge 178;
participation and barrier to entry
177–8; styles of learning, comparison
176–9
Osaka 153
Overseas Development Assistance (ODA)
210–11
pandemics 36
Paris: statistical conferences (1885, 1889)
19
participatory planning 13
Pascal International 47
Pateros, Philippines 188, 190
Philadelphia 124, 142; Economic
Leadership 145; Economy League 142
Philippines 9
Philips 208
Pittsburgh 150, 164
play 44
policy migration 95
Portella, José 131
Portland, Oregon 11, 12, 47, 113–19, 121,
122, 177, 178, 179, 193, 195;
Ambassadors Program 114; biking in
115, 116–18, 164; Chamber of
Commerce 115, 120; city-to-city
exchanges 172–5; cloud of trust 164–70;
exposure to outside sources 114–16;
governance 196; ideas imported with
immigrants 116–18; informal networks
and 164, 166; internal trust networks
118–19; learning mechanisms 114–19;
learning process 119, 120; Metro
Council 115, 196; network density 165;
origins of learning style 162; Portland
Development Commission 114; talent
195; urban growth boundary 113–14
Post, Gerry 142
Potchefstroom, South Africa 64–5
poverty 35; rural 25
power law 45
power nodes 165
power relationships 45
Prague 115
Price, Gordon 155
proactive cities 9, 15, 70, 75, 78, 80–2, 92,
94, 171, 176, 178, 184, 185, 199–200;
innovation and 82
process paralysis 59
Profumo, Francesco 108, 109, 165
Puget Sound Regional Partnership (PSRP)
153, 159, 160, 176
Quartiers en Crise 107
Rajasthan 4
Rayon (Thailand) 189
reasons for learning 68
regional competitiveness 42, 45
regional economy building 196–7
regionalization 29
234 Index
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
Resource Cities Program 61
Rio Conference (1992) 33
Rotterdam 58, 153
Ruiz, Saul 133
rural poverty 25
Salt Lake City 115
San Fernando 9
San Salvador 7
São Paulo 125
SARS 36
Seattle 6, 8, 10, 46, 57–60, 69, 70, 72, 177,
178, 179, 193, 195; best practice 70–1,
206; corporate learning 147, 153–6,
160; governance 196; motivation for
learning 68; network exchange 153–5;
Olympic Games 177; process paralysis
153–4; study missions 8–9, 57–60, 108;
Trade Development Alliance (TDA) 6, 8,
57, 58, 69, 71, 153, 159, 160, 177; visits
from other cities to 75–6
Seattle City Light (1977) 155
second-order learning 71–2, 193
Shanghai 6, 58, 59, 153, 192
Siemens 208
Singapore 58, 153, 219; corporate learning
147; Urban Redevelopment Authority
159
single-loop learning 42
Sister Cities movement 24, 32, 68, 78
slum dweller advocates 4
slums 14, 36
smart cities and learning 5–6
social capital 44, 45, 207
social distance 34
social movements 45
social network analysis 45
Sofia 153
soft infrastructure 43, 45, 46, 47, 82, 94,
102, 108, 163, 170, 178, 193, 198
Soviet Union, collapse of 29
Spain 9
spillovers 35
Stafford, Bill 154
Standing Committee on Urban and
Regional Statistics (SCORUS) 151
Stockholm 60, 81, 117, 171, 173;
Conference on the Human
Environment (1972) 25; learning
exchanges 80; visits from other cities to
76
storage 197–8
Stuttgart 58, 153
style 206
Sugimura, Diane 156
support 69, 70
Surabaya 187, 188, 189
sustainability 24
Sustainable Development Summit,
Johannesburg 2002 33
Swedish SIDA 209
Sydney 58, 153
System Dynamics Society 151
Tabriz 188
tacit knowledge 44
talent flows 47, 195
Tampere, Finland 44, 46, 177, 179;
CityWeb 159; corporate learning 147,
156–9, 159–60; network of actors 158
Taniguchi, Cassio 131
Tarragona, Spain 188; leadership 190, 191,
192
Tehran 188
think tank cities, comparison of 142–5;
financial sustainability 144; learning
modality and atmospherics 144–5;
origins and structure 143–4
third-order learning 192, 193
threshold cities 198
threshold of motivation 190–3
Tijuana 70
Torino Internazionale 106, 176
Toronto 35; visits from other cities to 76
Toulouse 197
town-twinning see twinning
Index 235
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
trade liberalization 35
triangulation 77
trust 42, 43, 44, 46, 198; milieu 11;
networks and 11–13; see also “clouds
of trust”
Turin 11, 12, 60, 63, 81, 121, 122, 178, 193,
195; city-to-city exchanges 172–5; cloud
of trust 164–70; connectivity 104;
exposure to outside influence 106–7;
high-speed rail 104; informal learning
style of 101–2; informal networks and
164, 166; internal networks 108–12;
internal trust networks 118–19;
knowledge economies 104–5;
leadership changes 190; learning
101–12, 120; learning apparatus 106;
learning exchanges 80; network density
165; Olympic Games (2006) 163; origins
of learning style 162, 163; Politecnico
102, 106, 108, 109; reform and
decentralization 102–3; strategic
planning 103–4, 105; talent 195; trusted
ties, interviewees 109–12; Winter
Olympic Games 2006 80, 102, 104, 105,
107, 179, 190
Turner, J.F.C. 23
twinning 32, 41, 60, 61, 62, 183, 184, 185,
194, 199, 200
typology of city learners 55–7; cities in
active networks 65–6; cities in passive
networks 66–7; city clusters on clusters
62–5; one on many 57–60; one-on-one
exchange 60–2, 68, 185, 194
United Cities and Local Governments
(UCLG) 33–4, 65, 69, 77
United Nations 63; Centre for Human
Settlements (UN-Habitat) 33, 55, 66;
Conference on Human Settlements,
Vancouver (1976) 25, 33, 65;
Development Programme (UNDP) 67;
+5 events, Istanbul (2001) 33
unemployment 36
UNESCO 63
UN-Habitat 33, 55; Best Practices 66; City
Summit, Istanbul (1996) 33
Union Internationale des Maires (UIM) 21,
32
United Towns Organization (UTO) 24, 32,
33
Urban Forum Network 151
urban migration 25
urban population 22
US Sister Cities International 62
USAID 61, 62, 67
Valencia 197
value sharing 42, 46
Vancouver 115; visits from other cities to
76
Vienna, Austria 153
Villareal, Francisco 140
virtual learning 72, 217
VNG (Association of Netherlands
Municipalities) 60–1, 62, 78
voting rights 19
Warsaw, Poland 171
water quality 24, 31, 140
weak ties 12, 65, 69, 198
Wilhelm, Jorge 127
World Bank 25, 34, 55, 63, 67, 69, 78, 92,
95, 133, 134, 212
World Bank Institute 211, 217; City Round
program 71, 210; DARE program
212–13
World Future Society 151
World Heritage Cities 62
World Heritage Convention 62, 63
World Heritage List (UNESCO) 63
World War I 20
Wray, Stephen 145
Yaro, Robert 116
Yokohama 77
Youngstown 12
236 Index
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015
Downloaded by [LSE Library Services] at 12:01 16 April 2015